ragging
me out of bed, regardless of the fresh ﬂow of blood
from my wound. The little monster was as strong
as a bull, and I don’t know what he might have
done to me had not an elderly man who was clearly
871
TheBlanched Soldier
in authority been attracted to the room by the hub-
bub. He said a few stern words in Dutch, and my
persecutor shrank away. Then he turned upon me,
gazing at me in the utmost amazement.
“ ‘How in the world did you come here?’ he
asked in amazement. ‘Wait a bit! I see that you
are tired out and that wounded shoulder of yours
wants looking after. I am a doctor, and I’ll soon
have you tied up. But, man alive! you are in far
greater danger here than ever you were on the bat-
tleﬁeld. You are in the Leper Hospital, and you
have slept in a leper’s bed.’
“Need I tell you more, Jimmie? It seems that in
view of the approaching battle all these poor crea-
tures had been evacuated the day before. Then, as
the British advanced, they had been brought back
by this, their medical superintendent, who assured
me that, though he believed he was immune to the
disease, he would none the less never have dared to
do what I had done. He put me in a private room,
treated me kindly, and within a week or so I was
removed to the general hospital at Pretoria.
“So there you have my tragedy. I hoped against
hope, but it was not until I had reached home that
the terrible signs which you see upon my face told
me that I had not escaped. What was I to do? I was
in this lonely house. We had two servants whom
we could utterly trust. There was a house where
I could live. Under pledge of secrecy, Mr. Kent,
who is a surgeon, was prepared to stay with me. It
seemed simple enough on those lines. The alterna-
tive was a dreadful one—segregation for life among
strangers with never a hope of release. But absolute
secrecy was necessary, or even in this quiet country-
side there would have been an outcry, and I should
have been dragged to my horrible doom. Even you,
Jimmie—even you had to be kept in the dark. Why
my father has relented I cannot imagine.”
Colonel Emsworth pointed to me.
“This is the gentleman who forced my hand.”
He unfolded the scrap of paper on which I had
written the word “Leprosy.” “It seemed to me that
if he knew so much as that it was safer that he
should know all.”
“And so it was,” said I. “Who knows but good
may come of it? I understand that only Mr. Kent
has seen the patient. May I ask, sir, if you are an
authority on such complaints, which are, I under-
stand, tropical or semi-tropical in their nature?”
“I have the ordinary knowledge of the educated
medical man,” he observed with some stiffness.
“I have no doubt, sir, that you are fully com-
petent, but I am sure that you will agree that insuch a case a second opinion is valuable. You have
avoided this, I understand, for fear that pressure
should be put upon you to segregate the patient.”
“That is so,” said Colonel Emsworth.
“I foresaw this situation,” I explained, “and I
have brought with me a friend whose discretion
may absolutely be trusted. I was able once to do
him a professional service, and he is ready to ad-
vise as a friend rather than as a specialist. His name
is Sir James Saunders.”
The prospect of an interview with Lord Roberts
would not have excited greater wonder and plea-
sure in a raw subaltern than was now reﬂected
upon the face of Mr. Kent.
“I shall indeed be proud,” he murmured.
“Then I will ask Sir James to step this way. He
is at present in the carriage outside the door. Mean-
while, Colonel Emsworth, we may perhaps assem-
ble in your study, where I could give the necessary
explanations.”
And here it is that I miss my Watson. By cun-
ning questions and ejaculations of wonder he could
elevate my simple art, which is but systematized
common sense, into a prodigy. When I tell my own
story I have no such aid. And yet I will give my
process of thought even as I gave it to my small
audience, which included Godfrey’s mother in the
study of Colonel Emsworth.
“That process,” said I, “starts upon the suppo-
sition that when you have eliminated all which is
impossible, then whatever remains, however im-
probable, must be the truth. It may well be that
several explanations remain, in which case one tries
test after test until one or other of them has a con-
vincing amount of support. We will now apply
this principle to the case in point. As it was ﬁrst
presented to me, there were three possible expla-
nations of the seclusion or incarceration of this
gentleman in an outhouse of his father’s mansion.
There was the explanation that he was in hiding for
a crime, or that he was mad and that they wished
to avoid an asylum, or that he had some disease
which caused his segregation. I could think of no
other adequate solutions. These, then, had to be
sifted and balanced against each other.
“The criminal solution would not bear inspec-
tion. No unsolved crime had been reported from
that district. I was sure of that. If it were some
crime not yet discovered, then clearly it would be
to the interest of the family to get rid of the delin-
quent and send him abroad rather than keep him
concealed at home. I could see no explanation for
such a line of conduct.
872
“Insanity was more plausible. The presence
of the second person in the outhouse suggested a
keeper. The fact that he locked the door when he
came out strengthened the supposition and gave
the idea of constraint. On the other hand, this con-
straint could not be severe or the young man could
not have got loose and come down to have a look
at his friend. You will remember, Mr. Dodd, that
I felt round for points, asking you, for example,
about the paper which Mr. Kent was reading. Had
it been the Lancet or the British Medical Journal it
would have helped me. It is not illegal, however,
to keep a lunatic upon private premises so long as
there is a qualiﬁed person in attendance and that
the authorities have been duly notiﬁed. Why, then,
all this desperate desire for secrecy? Once again I
could not get the theory to ﬁt the facts.
“There remained the third possibility, into
which, rare and unlikely as it was, everything
seemed to ﬁt. Leprosy is not uncommon in South
Africa. By some extraordinary chance this youth
might have contracted it. His people would be
placed in a very dreadful position, since they would
desire to save him from segregation. Great secrecy
would be needed to prevent rumours from getting
about and subsequent interference by the author-
ities. A devoted medical man, if sufﬁciently paid,
would easily be found to take charge of the sufferer.
There would be no reason why the latter should
not be allowed freedom after dark. Bleaching of the
skin is a common result of the disease. The case
was a strong one—so strong that I determined toact as if it were actually proved. When on arriving
here I noticed that Ralph, who carries out the meals,
had gloves which are impregnated with disinfec-
tants, my last doubts were removed. A single word
showed you, sir, that your secret was discovered,
and if I wrote rather than said it, it was to prove to
you that my discretion was to be trusted.”
I was ﬁnishing this little analysis of the case
when the door was opened and the austere ﬁgure
of the great dermatologist was ushered in. But for
once his sphinx-like features had relaxed and there
was a warm humanity in his eyes. He strode up to
Colonel Emsworth and shook him by the hand.
“It is often my lot to bring ill-tidings and sel-
dom good,” said he. “This occasion is the more
welcome. It is not leprosy.”
“What?”
“A well-marked case of pseudo-leprosy or
ichthyosis, a scale-like affection of the skin, un-
sightly, obstinate, but possibly curable, and cer-
tainly noninfective. Yes, Mr. Holmes, the coinci-
dence is a remarkable one. But is it coincidence?
Are there not subtle forces at work of which we
know little? Are we assured that the apprehen-
sion from which this young man has no doubt
suffered terribly since his exposure to its contagion
may not produce a physical effect which simulates
that which it fears? At any rate, I pledge my pro-
fessional reputation— But the lady has fainted! I
think that Mr. Kent had better be with her until she
recovers from this joyous shock.”
873

The Adventure Of The Mazarin Stone

It was pleasant to Dr. Watson to ﬁnd him-
self once more in the untidy room of the
ﬁrst ﬂoor in Baker Street which had been
the starting-point of so many remarkable
adventures. He looked round him at the scientiﬁc
charts upon the wall, the acid-charred bench of
chemicals, the violin-case leaning in the corner, the
coal-scuttle, which contained of old the pipes and
tobacco. Finally, his eyes came round to the fresh
and smiling face of Billy, the young but very wise
and tactful page, who had helped a little to ﬁll
up the gap of loneliness and isolation which sur-
rounded the saturnine ﬁgure of the great detective.
“It all seems very unchanged, Billy. You don’t
change, either. I hope the same can be said of him?”
Billy glanced with some solicitude at the closed
door of the bedroom.
“I think he’s in bed and asleep,” he said.
It was seven in the evening of a lovely summer’s
day, but Dr. Watson was sufﬁciently familiar with
the irregularity of his old friend’s hours to feel no
surprise at the idea.
“That means a case, I suppose?”
“Yes, sir, he is very hard at it just now. I’m
frightened for his health. He gets paler and thinner,
and he eats nothing. ‘When will you be pleased to
dine, Mr. Holmes?’ Mrs. Hudson asked. ‘Seven-
thirty, the day after to-morrow,’ said he. You know
his way when he is keen on a case.”
“Yes, Billy, I know.”
“He’s following someone. Yesterday he was out
as a workman looking for a job. To-day he was an
old woman. Fairly took me in, he did, and I ought
to know his ways by now.” Billy pointed with a
grin to a very baggy parasol which leaned against
the sofa. “That’s part of the old woman’s outﬁt,”
he said.
“But what is it all about, Billy?”
Billy sank his voice, as one who discusses great
secrets of State. “I don’t mind telling you, sir, but
it should go no farther. It’s this case of the Crown
diamond.”
“What—the hundred-thousand-pound bur-
glary?”
“Yes, sir. They must get it back, sir. Why, we
had the Prime Minister and the Home Secretary
both sitting on that very sofa. Mr. Holmes was very
nice to them. He soon put them at their ease and
promised he would do all he could. Then there is
Lord Cantlemere—”
“Ah!”“Yes, sir, you know what that means. He’s a
stiff ’un, sir, if I may say so. I can get along with
the Prime Minister, and I’ve nothing against the
Home Secretary, who seemed a civil, obliging sort
of man, but I can’t stand his Lordship. Neither can
Mr. Holmes, sir. You see, he don’t believe in Mr.
Holmes and he was against employing him. He’d
rather he failed.”
“And Mr. Holmes knows it?”
“Mr. Holmes always knows whatever there is to
know.”
“Well, we’ll hope he won’t fail and that Lord
Cantlemere will be confounded. But I say, Billy,
what is that curtain for across the window?”
“Mr. Holmes had it put up there three days ago.
We’ve got something funny behind it.”
Billy advanced and drew away the drapery
which screened the alcove of the bow window.
Dr. Watson could not restrain a cry of amaze-
ment. There was a facsimile of his old friend,
dressing-gown and all, the face turned three-
quarters towards the window and downward, as
though reading an invisible book, while the body
was sunk deep in an armchair. Billy detached the
head and held it in the air.
“We put it at different angles, so that it may
seem more lifelike. I wouldn’t dare touch it if the
blind were not down. But when it’s up you can see
this from across the way.”
“We used something of the sort once before.”
“Before my time,” said Billy. He drew the win-
dow curtains apart and looked out into the street.
“There are folk who watch us from over yonder. I
can see a fellow now at the window. Have a look
for yourself.”
Watson had taken a step forward when the
bedroom door opened, and the long, thin form
of Holmes emerged, his face pale and drawn, but
his step and bearing as active as ever. With a single
spring he was at the window, and had drawn the
blind once more.
“That will do, Billy,” said he. “You were in dan-
ger of your life then, my boy, and I can’t do without
you just yet. Well, Watson, it is good to see you in
your old quarters once again. You come at a critical
moment.”
“So I gather.”
“You can go, Billy. That boy is a problem, Wat-
son. How far am I justiﬁed in allowing him to be
in danger?”
“Danger of what, Holmes?”
“Of sudden death. I’m expecting something this
evening.”
877
TheAdventure OfTheMazarin Stone
“Expecting what?”
“To be murdered, Watson.”
“No, no, you are joking, Holmes!”
“Even my limited sense of humour could evolve
a better joke than that. But we may be comfortable
in the meantime, may we not? Is alcohol permitted?
The gasogene and cigars are in the old place. Let
me see you once more in the customary armchair.
You have not, I hope, learned to despise my pipe
and my lamentable tobacco? It has to take the place
of food these days.”
“But why not eat?”
“Because the faculties become reﬁned when you
starve them. Why, surely, as a doctor, my dear Wat-
son, you must admit that what your digestion gains
in the way of blood supply is so much lost to the
brain. I am a brain, Watson. The rest of me is a
mere appendix. Therefore, it is the brain I must
consider.”
“But this danger, Holmes?”
“Ah, yes, in case it should come off, it would
perhaps be as well that you should burden your
memory with the name and address of the mur-
derer. You can give it to Scotland Yard, with
my love and a parting blessing. Sylvius is the
name—Count Negretto Sylvius. Write it down,
man, write it down! 136Moorside Gardens, N. W.
Got it?”
Watson’s honest face was twitching with anxiety.
He knew only too well the immense risks taken by
Holmes and was well aware that what he said was
more likely to be under-statement than exaggera-
tion. Watson was always the man of action, and he
rose to the occasion.
“Count me in, Holmes. I have nothing to do for
a day or two.”
“Your morals don’t improve, Watson. You have
added ﬁbbing to your other vices. You bear every
sign of the busy medical man, with calls on him
every hour.”
“Not such important ones. But can’t you have
this fellow arrested?”
“Yes, Watson, I could. That’s what worries him
so.”
“But why don’t you?”
“Because I don’t know where the diamond is.”
“Ah! Billy told me—the missing Crown jewel!”
“Yes, the great yellow Mazarin stone. I’ve cast
my net and I have my ﬁsh. But I have not got the
stone. What is the use of taking them ? We can make
the world a better place by laying them by the heels.But that is not what I am out for. It’s the stone I
want.”
“And is this Count Sylvius one of your ﬁsh?”
“Yes, and he’s a shark. He bites. The other is
Sam Merton, the boxer. Not a bad fellow, Sam, but
the Count has used him. Sam’s not a shark. He
is a great big silly bull-headed gudgeon. But he is
ﬂopping about in my net all the same.”
“Where is this Count Sylvius?”
“I’ve been at his very elbow all the morning.
You’ve seen me as an old lady, Watson. I was never
more convincing. He actually picked up my para-
sol for me once. ‘By your leave, madame,’ said
he—half-Italian, you know, and with the Southern
graces of manner when in the mood, but a devil in-
carnate in the other mood. Life is full of whimsical
happenings, Watson.”
“It might have been tragedy.”
“Well, perhaps it might. I followed him to old
Straubenzee’s workshop in the Minories. Strauben-
zee made the air-gun—a very pretty bit of work, as
I understand, and I rather fancy it is in the opposite
window at the present moment. Have you seen the
dummy? Of course, Billy showed it to you. Well, it
may get a bullet through its beautiful head at any
moment. Ah, Billy, what is it?”
The boy had reappeared in the room with a
card upon a tray. Holmes glanced at it with raised
eyebrows and an amused smile.
“The man himself. I had hardly expected this.
Grasp the nettle, Watson! A man of nerve. Possibly
you have heard of his reputation as a shooter of big
game. It would indeed be a triumphant ending to
his excellent sporting record if he added me to his
bag. This is a proof that he feels my toe very close
behind his heel.”
“Send for the police.”
“I probably shall. But not just yet. Would you
glance carefully out of the window, Watson, and
see if anyone is hanging about in the street?”
Watson looked warily round the edge of the
curtain.
“Yes, there is one rough fellow near the door.”
“That will be Sam Merton—the faithful but
rather fatuous Sam. Where is this gentleman,
Billy?”
“In the waiting-room, sir.”
“Show him up when I ring.”
“Yes, sir.”
“If I am not in the room, show him in all the
same.”
“Yes, sir.”
878
Watson waited until the door was closed, and
then he turned earnestly to his companion.
“Look here, Holmes, this is simply impossible.
This is a desperate man, who sticks at nothing. He
may have come to murder you.”
“I should not be surprised.”
“I insist upon staying with you.”
“You would be horribly in the way.”
“In his way?”
“No, my dear fellow—in my way.”
“Well, I can’t possibly leave you.”
“Yes, you can, Watson. And you will, for you
have never failed to play the game. I am sure
you will play it to the end. This man has come
for his own purpose, but he may stay for mine.”
Holmes took out his notebook and scribbled a few
lines. “Take a cab to Scotland Yard and give this to
Youghal of the C. I. D. Come back with the police.
The fellow’s arrest will follow.”
“I’ll do that with joy.”
“Before you return I may have just time enough
to ﬁnd out where the stone is.” He touched the bell.
“I think we will go out through the bedroom. This
second exit is exceedingly useful. I rather want to
see my shark without his seeing me, and I have, as
you will remember, my own way of doing it.”
It was, therefore, an empty room into which
Billy, a minute later, ushered Count Sylvius. The fa-
mous game-shot, sportsman, and man-about-town
was a big, swarthy fellow, with a formidable dark
moustache shading a cruel, thin-lipped mouth, and
surmounted by a long, curved nose like the beak
of an eagle. He was well dressed, but his brilliant
necktie, shining pin, and glittering rings were ﬂam-
boyant in their effect. As the door closed behind
him he looked round him with ﬁerce, startled eyes,
like one who suspects a trap at every turn. Then he
gave a violent start as he saw the impassive head
and the collar of the dressing-gown which pro-
jected above the armchair in the window. At ﬁrst
his expression was one of pure amazement. Then
the light of a horrible hope gleamed in his dark,
murderous eyes. He took one more glance round
to see that there were no witnesses, and then, on
tiptoe, his thick stick half raised, he approached the
silent ﬁgure. He was crouching for his ﬁnal spring
and blow when a cool, sardonic voice greeted him
from the open bedroom door:
“Don’t break it, Count! Don’t break it!”
The assassin staggered back, amazement in his
convulsed face. For an instant he half raised his
loaded cane once more, as if he would turn hisviolence from the efﬁgy to the original; but there
was something in that steady gray eye and mocking
smile which caused his hand to sink to his side.
“It’s a pretty little thing,” said Holmes, advanc-
ing towards the image. “Tavernier, the French mod-
eller, made it. He is as good at waxworks as your
friend Straubenzee is at air-guns.”
“Air-guns, sir! What do you mean?”
“Put your hat and stick on the side-table. Thank
you! Pray take a seat. Would you care to put your
revolver out also? Oh, very good, if you prefer to
sit upon it. Your visit is really most opportune, for
I wanted badly to have a few minutes’ chat with
you.”
The Count scowled, with heavy, threatening
eyebrows.
“I, too, wished to have some words with you,
Holmes. That is why I am here. I won’t deny that I
intended to assault you just now.”
Holmes swung his leg on the edge of the table.
“I rather gathered that you had some idea of
the sort in your head,” said he. “But why these
personal attentions?”
“Because you have gone out of your way to an-
noy me. Because you have put your creatures upon
my track.”
“My creatures! I assure you no!”
“Nonsense! I have had them followed. Two can
play at that game, Holmes.”
“It is a small point, Count Sylvius, but perhaps
you would kindly give me my preﬁx when you
address me. You can understand that, with my
routine of work, I should ﬁnd myself on familiar
terms with half the rogues’ gallery, and you will
agree that exceptions are invidious.”
“Well, Mr. Holmes, then.”
“Excellent! But I assure you you are mistaken
about my alleged agents.”
Count Sylvius laughed contemptuously.
“Other people can observe as well as you. Yes-
terday there was an old sporting man. To-day it
was an elderly woman. They held me in view all
day.”
“Really, sir, you compliment me. Old Baron
Dowson said the night before he was hanged that
in my case what the law had gained the stage had
lost. And now you give my little impersonations
your kindly praise?”
“It was you—you yourself?”
Holmes shrugged his shoulders. “You can see
in the corner the parasol which you so politely
879
TheAdventure OfTheMazarin Stone
handed to me in the Minories before you began to
suspect.”
“If I had known, you might never—”
“Have seen this humble home again. I was well
aware of it. We all have neglected opportunities to
deplore. As it happens, you did not know, so here
we are!”
The Count’s knotted brows gathered more heav-
ily over his menacing eyes. “What you say only
makes the matter worse. It was not your agents but
your play-acting, busybody self! You admit that
you have dogged me. Why?”
“Come now, Count. You used to shoot lions in
Algeria.”
“Well?”
“But why?”
“Why? The sport—the excitement—the dan-
ger!”
“And, no doubt, to free the country from a
pest?”
“Exactly!”
“My reasons in a nutshell!”
The Count sprang to his feet, and his hand in-
voluntarily moved back to his hip-pocket.
“Sit down, sir, sit down! There was another,
more practical, reason. I want that yellow dia-
mond!”
Count Sylvius lay back in his chair with an evil
smile.
“Upon my word!” said he.
“You knew that I was after you for that. The
real reason why you are here to-night is to ﬁnd out
how much I know about the matter and how far
my removal is absolutely essential. Well, I should
say that, from your point of view, it is absolutely es-
sential, for I know all about it, save only one thing,
which you are about to tell me.”
“Oh, indeed! And pray, what is this missing
fact?”
“Where the Crown diamond now is.”
The Count looked sharply at his companion.
“Oh, you want to know that, do you? How the
devil should I be able to tell you where it is?”
“You can, and you will.”
“Indeed!”
“You can’t bluff me, Count Sylvius.” Holmes’s
eyes, as he gazed at him, contracted and lightened
until they were like two menacing points of steel.
“You are absolute plate-glass. I see to the very back
of your mind.”“Then, of course, you see where the diamond
is!”
Holmes clapped his hands with amusement,
and then pointed a derisive ﬁnger. “Then you do
know. You have admitted it!”
“I admit nothing.”
“Now, Count, if you will be reasonable we can
do business. If not, you will get hurt.”
Count Sylvius threw up his eyes to the ceiling.
“And you talk about bluff!” said he.
Holmes looked at him thoughtfully like a mas-
ter chess-player who meditates his crowning move.
Then he threw open the table drawer and drew out
a squat notebook.
“Do you know what I keep in this book?”
“No, sir, I do not!”
“You!”
“Me!”
“Yes, sir, you! You are all here—every action of
your vile and dangerous life.”
“Damn you, Holmes!” cried the Count with
blazing eyes. “There are limits to my patience!”
“It’s all here, Count. The real facts as to the
death of old Mrs. Harold, who left you the Blymer
estate, which you so rapidly gambled away.”
“You are dreaming!”
“And the complete life history of Miss Minnie
Warrender.”
“Tut! You will make nothing of that!”
“Plenty more here, Count. Here is the robbery
in the train de-luxe to the Riviera on February 13,
1892 . Here is the forged check in the same year on
the Credit Lyonnais.”
“No; you’re wrong there.”
“Then I am right on the others! Now, Count,
you are a card-player. When the other fellow has
all the trumps, it saves time to throw down your
hand.”
“What has all this talk to do with the jewel of
which you spoke?”
“Gently, Count. Restrain that eager mind! Let
me get to the points in my own humdrum fashion.
I have all this against you; but, above all, I have a
clear case against both you and your ﬁghting bully
in the case of the Crown diamond.”
“Indeed!”
“I have the cabman who took you to Whitehall
and the cabman who brought you away. I have the
commissionaire who saw you near the case. I have
Ikey Sanders, who refused to cut it up for you. Ikey
has peached, and the game is up.”
880
The veins stood out on the Count’s forehead.
His dark, hairy hands were clenched in a convul-
sion of restrained emotion. He tried to speak, but
the words would not shape themselves.
“That’s the hand I play from,” said Holmes. “I
put it all upon the table. But one card is missing.
It’s the king of diamonds. I don’t know where the
stone is.”
“You never shall know.”
“No? Now, be reasonable, Count. Consider
the situation. You are going to be locked up for
twenty years. So is Sam Merton. What good are
you going to get out of your diamond? None in the
world. But if you hand it over—well, I’ll compound
a felony. We don’t want you or Sam. We want the
stone. Give that up, and so far as I am concerned
you can go free so long as you behave yourself in
the future. If you make another slip—well, it will
be the last. But this time my commission is to get
the stone, not you.”
“But if I refuse?”
“Why, then—alas!—it must be you and not the
stone.”
Billy had appeared in answer to a ring.
“I think, Count, that it would be as well to have
your friend Sam at this conference. After all, his
interests should be represented. Billy, you will see
a large and ugly gentleman outside the front door.
Ask him to come up.”
“If he won’t come, sir?”
“No violence, Billy. Don’t be rough with him. If
you tell him that Count Sylvius wants him he will
certainly come.”
“What are you going to do now?” asked the
Count as Billy disappeared.
“My friend Watson was with me just now. I
told him that I had a shark and a gudgeon in my
net; now I am drawing the net and up they come
together.”
The Count had risen from his chair, and his
hand was behind his back. Holmes held something
half protruding from the pocket of his dressing-
gown.
“You won’t die in your bed, Holmes.”
“I have often had the same idea. Does it matter
very much? After all, Count, your own exit is more
likely to be perpendicular than horizontal. But
these anticipations of the future are morbid. Why
not give ourselves up to the unrestrained enjoyment
of the present?”
A sudden wild-beast light sprang up in the dark,
menacing eyes of the master criminal. Holmes’sﬁgure seemed to grow taller as he grew tense and
ready.
“It is no use your ﬁngering your revolver, my
friend,” he said in a quiet voice. “You know per-
fectly well that you dare not use it, even if I gave
you time to draw it. Nasty, noisy things, revolvers,
Count. Better stick to air-guns. Ah! I think I hear
the fairy footstep of your estimable partner. Good
day, Mr. Merton. Rather dull in the street, is it not?”
The prize-ﬁghter, a heavily built young man
with a stupid, obstinate, slab-sided face, stood awk-
wardly at the door, looking about him with a puz-
zled expression. Holmes’s debonair manner was a
new experience, and though he vaguely felt that it
was hostile, he did not know how to counter it. He
turned to his more astute comrade for help.
“What’s the game now, Count? What’s this fel-
low want? What’s up?” His voice was deep and
raucous.
The Count shrugged his shoulders, and it was
Holmes who answered.
“If I may put it in a nutshell, Mr. Merton, I
should say it was all up.”
The boxer still addressed his remarks to his
associate.
“Is this cove trying to be funny, or what? I’m
not in the funny mood myself.”
“No, I expect not,” said Holmes. “I think I can
promise you that you will feel even less humorous
as the evening advances. Now, look here, Count
Sylvius. I’m a busy man and I can’t waste time.
I’m going into that bedroom. Pray make yourselves
quite at home in my absence. You can explain
to your friend how the matter lies without the re-
straint of my presence. I shall try over the Hoffman
‘Barcarole’ upon my violin. In ﬁve minutes I shall
return for your ﬁnal answer. You quite grasp the
alternative, do you not? Shall we take you, or shall
we have the stone?”
Holmes withdrew, picking up his violin from
the corner as he passed. A few moments later the
long-drawn, wailing notes of that most haunting of
tunes came faintly through the closed door of the
bedroom.
“What is it, then?” asked Merton anxiously as
his companion turned to him. “Does he know
about the stone?”
“He knows a damned sight too much about it.
I’m not sure that he doesn’t know all about it.”
“Good Lord!” The boxer’s sallow face turned a
shade whiter.
“Ikey Sanders has split on us.”
881
TheAdventure OfTheMazarin Stone
“He has, has he? I’ll do him down a thick ’un
for that if I swing for it.”
“That won’t help us much. We’ve got to make
up our minds what to do.”
“Half a mo’,” said the boxer, looking suspi-
ciously at the bedroom door. “He’s a leary cove
that wants watching. I suppose he’s not listening?”
“How can he be listening with that music go-
ing?”
“That’s right. Maybe somebody’s behind a cur-
tain. Too many curtains in this room.” As he looked
round he suddenly saw for the ﬁrst time the efﬁgy
in the window, and stood staring and pointing, too
amazed for words.
“Tut! it’s only a dummy,” said the Count.
“A fake, is it? Well, strike me! Madame Tussaud
ain’t in it. It’s the living spit of him, gown and all.
But them curtains, Count!”
“Oh, confound the curtains! We are wasting our
time, and there is none too much. He can lag us
over this stone.”
“The deuce he can!”
“But he’ll let us slip if we only tell him where
the swag is.”
“What! Give it up? Give up a hundred thou-
sand quid?”
“It’s one or the other.”
Merton scratched his short-cropped pate.
“He’s alone in there. Let’s do him in. If his light
were out we should have nothing to fear.”
The Count shook his head.
“He is armed and ready. If we shot him we
could hardly get away in a place like this. Besides,
it’s likely enough that the police know whatever
evidence he has got. Hallo! What was that?”
There was a vague sound which seemed to come
from the window. Both men sprang round, but all
was quiet. Save for the one strange ﬁgure seated in
the chair, the room was certainly empty.
“Something in the street,” said Merton. “Now
look here, guv’nor, you’ve got the brains. Surely
you can think a way out of it. If slugging is no use
then it’s up to you.”
“I’ve fooled better men than he,” the Count an-
swered. “The stone is here in my secret pocket. I
take no chances leaving it about. It can be out of
England to-night and cut into four pieces in Ams-
terdam before Sunday. He knows nothing of Van
Seddar.”
“I thought Van Seddar was going next week.”“He was. But now he must get off by the next
boat. One or other of us must slip round with the
stone to Lime Street and tell him.”
“But the false bottom ain’t ready.”
“Well, he must take it as it is and chance it.
There’s not a moment to lose.” Again, with the
sense of danger which becomes an instinct with
the sportsman, he paused and looked hard at the
window. Yes, it was surely from the street that the
faint sound had come.
“As to Holmes,” he continued, “we can fool
him easily enough. You see, the damned fool won’t
arrest us if he can get the stone. Well, we’ll promise
him the stone. We’ll put him on the wrong track
about it, and before he ﬁnds that it is the wrong
track it will be in Holland and we out of the coun-
try.”
“That sounds good to me!” cried Sam Merton
with a grin.
“You go on and tell the Dutchman to get a move
on him. I’ll see this sucker and ﬁll him up with a
bogus confession. I’ll tell him that the stone is in
Liverpool. Confound that whining music; it gets
on my nerves! By the time he ﬁnds it isn’t in Liver-
pool it will be in quarters and we on the blue water.
Come back here, out of a line with that keyhole.
Here is the stone.”
“I wonder you dare carry it.”
“Where could I have it safer? If we could take
it out of Whitehall someone else could surely take
it out of my lodgings.”
“Let’s have a look at it.”
Count Sylvius cast a somewhat unﬂattering
glance at his associate and disregarded the un-
washed hand which was extended towards him.
“What—d’ye think I’m going to snatch it off
you? See here, mister, I’m getting a bit tired of your
ways.”
“Well, well, no offence, Sam. We can’t afford to
quarrel. Come over to the window if you want to
see the beauty properly. Now hold it to the light!
Here!”
“Thank you!”
With a single spring Holmes had leaped from
the dummy’s chair and had grasped the precious
jewel. He held it now in one hand, while his other
pointed a revolver at the Count’s head. The two
villains staggered back in utter amazement. Before
they had recovered Holmes had pressed the electric
bell.
“No violence, gentlemen—no violence, I beg of
you! Consider the furniture! It must be very clear
882
to you that your position is an impossible one. The
police are waiting below.”
The Count’s bewilderment overmastered his
rage and fear.
“But how the deuce—?” he gasped.
“Your surprise is very natural. You are not
aware that a second door from my bedroom leads
behind that curtain. I fancied that you must have
heard me when I displaced the ﬁgure, but luck was
on my side. It gave me a chance of listening to your
racy conversation which would have been painfully
constrained had you been aware of my presence.”
The Count gave a gesture of resignation.
“We give you best, Holmes. I believe you are
the devil himself.”
“Not far from him, at any rate,” Holmes an-
swered with a polite smile.
Sam Merton’s slow intellect had only gradually
appreciated the situation. Now, as the sound of
heavy steps came from the stairs outside, he broke
silence at last.
“A fair cop!” said he. “But, I say, what about
that bloomin’ ﬁddle! I hear it yet.”
“Tut, tut!” Holmes answered. “You are perfectly
right. Let it play! These modern gramophones are
a remarkable invention.”
There was an inrush of police, the handcuffs
clicked and the criminals were led to the waiting
cab. Watson lingered with Holmes, congratulat-
ing him upon this fresh leaf added to his laurels.
Once more their conversation was interrupted by
the imperturbable Billy with his card-tray.
“Lord Cantlemere, sir.”
“Show him up, Billy. This is the eminent peer
who represents the very highest interests,” said
Holmes. “He is an excellent and loyal person, but
rather of the old regime. Shall we make him un-
bend? Dare we venture upon a slight liberty? He
knows, we may conjecture, nothing of what has
occurred.”
The door opened to admit a thin, austere ﬁg-
ure with a hatchet face and drooping mid-Victorian
whiskers of a glossy blackness which hardly cor-
responded with the rounded shoulders and feeble
gait. Holmes advanced affably, and shook an unre-
sponsive hand.
“How do you do, Lord Cantlemere? It is chilly
for the time of year, but rather warm indoors. May
I take your overcoat?”
“No, I thank you; I will not take it off.”Holmes laid his hand insistently upon the
sleeve.
“Pray allow me! My friend Dr. Watson would
assure you that these changes of temperature are
most insidious.”
His Lordship shook himself free with some im-
patience.
“I am quite comfortable, sir. I have no need to
stay. I have simply looked in to know how your
self-appointed task was progressing.”
“It is difﬁcult—very difﬁcult.”
“I feared that you would ﬁnd it so.”
There was a distinct sneer in the old courtier’s
words and manner.
“Every man ﬁnds his limitations, Mr. Holmes,
but at least it cures us of the weakness of self-
satisfaction.”
“Yes, sir, I have been much perplexed.”
“No doubt.”
“Especially upon one point. Possibly you could
help me upon it?”
“You apply for my advice rather late in the day.
I thought that you had your own all-sufﬁcient meth-
ods. Still, I am ready to help you.”
“You see, Lord Cantlemere, we can no doubt
frame a case against the actual thieves.”
“When you have caught them.”
“Exactly. But the question is—how shall we
proceed against the receiver?”
“Is this not rather premature?”
“It is as well to have our plans ready. Now,
what would you regard as ﬁnal evidence against
the receiver?”
“The actual possession of the stone.”
“You would arrest him upon that?”
“Most undoubtedly.”
Holmes seldom laughed, but he got as near it
as his old friend Watson could remember.
“In that case, my dear sir, I shall be under the
painful necessity of advising your arrest.”
Lord Cantlemere was very angry. Some of the
ancient ﬁres ﬂickered up into his sallow cheeks.
“You take a great liberty, Mr. Holmes. In ﬁfty
years of ofﬁcial life I cannot recall such a case. I am
a busy man, sir, engaged upon important affairs,
and I have no time or taste for foolish jokes. I may
tell you frankly, sir, that I have never been a believer
in your powers, and that I have always been of the
opinion that the matter was far safer in the hands
of the regular police force. Your conduct conﬁrms
all my conclusions. I have the honour, sir, to wish
you good-evening.”
883
TheAdventure OfTheMazarin Stone
Holmes had swiftly changed his position and
was between the peer and the door.
“One moment, sir,” said he. “To actually go off
with the Mazarin stone would be a more serious
offence than to be found in temporary possession
of it.”
“Sir, this is intolerable! Let me pass.”
“Put your hand in the right-hand pocket of your
overcoat.”
“What do you mean, sir?”
“Come—come, do what I ask.”
An instant later the amazed peer was standing,
blinking and stammering, with the great yellow
stone on his shaking palm.
“What! What! How is this, Mr. Holmes?”
“Too bad, Lord Cantlemere, too bad!” cried
Holmes. “My old friend here will tell you that
I have an impish habit of practical joking. Also that
I can never resist a dramatic situation. I took theliberty—the very great liberty, I admit—of putting
the stone into your pocket at the beginning of our
interview.”
The old peer stared from the stone to the smil-
ing face before him.
“Sir, I am bewildered. But—yes—it is indeed
the Mazarin stone. We are greatly your debtors,
Mr. Holmes. Your sense of humour may, as you
admit, be somewhat perverted, and its exhibition
remarkably untimely, but at least I withdraw any
reﬂection I have made upon your amazing profes-
sional powers. But how—”
“The case is but half ﬁnished; the details can
wait. No doubt, Lord Cantlemere, your pleasure in
telling of this successful result in the exalted circle
to which you return will be some small atonement
for my practical joke. Billy, you will show his Lord-
ship out, and tell Mrs. Hudson that I should be
glad if she would send up dinner for two as soon
as possible.”
884
The Adventure of the Three Gables

Idon ’tthink that any of my adventures
with Mr. Sherlock Holmes opened quite
so abruptly, or so dramatically, as that
which I associate with The Three Gables.
I had not seen Holmes for some days and had no
idea of the new channel into which his activities
had been directed. He was in a chatty mood that
morning, however, and had just settled me into
the well-worn low armchair on one side of the ﬁre,
while he had curled down with his pipe in his
mouth upon the opposite chair, when our visitor
arrived. If I had said that a mad bull had arrived it
would give a clearer impression of what occurred.
The door had ﬂown open and a huge negro
had burst into the room. He would have been
a comic ﬁgure if he had not been terriﬁc, for he
was dressed in a very loud gray check suit with a
ﬂowing salmon-coloured tie. His broad face and
ﬂattened nose were thrust forward, as his sullen
dark eyes, with a smouldering gleam of malice in
them, turned from one of us to the other.
“Which of you gen’l’men is Masser Holmes?”
he asked.
Holmes raised his pipe with a languid smile.
“Oh! it’s you, is it?” said our visitor, coming
with an unpleasant, stealthy step round the an-
gle of the table. “See here, Masser Holmes, you
keep your hands out of other folks’ business. Leave
folks to manage their own affairs. Got that, Masser
Holmes?”
“Keep on talking,” said Holmes. “It’s ﬁne.”
“Oh! it’s ﬁne, is it?” growled the savage. “It
won’t be so damn ﬁne if I have to trim you up a bit.
I’ve handled your kind before now, and they didn’t
look ﬁne when I was through with them. Look at
that, Masser Holmes!”
He swung a huge knotted lump of a ﬁst under
my friend’s nose. Holmes examined it closely with
an air of great interest. “Were you born so?” he
asked. “Or did it come by degrees?”
It may have been the icy coolness of my friend,
or it may have been the slight clatter which I made
as I picked up the poker. In any case, our visitor’s
manner became less ﬂamboyant.
“Well, I’ve given you fair warnin’,” said
he. “I’ve a friend that’s interested out Harrow
way—you know what I’m meaning—and he don’t
intend to have no buttin’ in by you. Got that? You
ain’t the law, and I ain’t the law either, and if you
come in I’ll be on hand also. Don’t you forget it.”
“I’ve wanted to meet you for some time,” said
Holmes. “I won’t ask you to sit down, for I don’tlike the smell of you, but aren’t you Steve Dixie, the
bruiser?”
“That’s my name, Masser Holmes, and you’ll
get put through it for sure if you give me any lip.”
“It is certainly the last thing you need,” said
Holmes, staring at our visitor’s hideous mouth.
“But it was the killing of young Perkins outside the
Holborn Bar— What! you’re not going?”
The negro had sprung back, and his face was
leaden. “I won’t listen to no such talk,” said he.
“What have I to do with this ’ere Perkins, Masser
Holmes? I was trainin’ at the Bull Ring in Birming-
ham when this boy done gone get into trouble.”
“Yes, you’ll tell the magistrate about it, Steve,”
said Holmes. “I’ve been watching you and Barney
Stockdale—”
“So help me the Lord! Masser Holmes—”
“That’s enough. Get out of it. I’ll pick you up
when I want you.”
“Good-mornin’, Masser Holmes. I hope there
ain’t no hard feelin’s about this ’ere visit?”
“There will be unless you tell me who sent you.”
“Why, there ain’t no secret about that, Masser
Holmes. It was that same gen’l’man that you have
just done gone mention.”
“And who set him on to it?”
“S’elp me. I don’t know, Masser Holmes. He
just say, ‘Steve, you go see Mr. Holmes, and tell
him his life ain’t safe if he go down Harrow way.’
That’s the whole truth.” Without waiting for any
further questioning, our visitor bolted out of the
room almost as precipitately as he had entered.
Holmes knocked out the ashes of his pipe with a
quiet chuckle.
“I am glad you were not forced to break his
woolly head, Watson. I observed your manoeuvres
with the poker. But he is really rather a harmless
fellow, a great muscular, foolish, blustering baby,
and easily cowed, as you have seen. He is one of
the Spencer John gang and has taken part in some
dirty work of late which I may clear up when I have
time. His immediate principal, Barney, is a more
astute person. They specialize in assaults, intimida-
tion, and the like. What I want to know is, who is
at the back of them on this particular occasion?”
“But why do they want to intimidate you?”
“It is this Harrow Weald case. It decides me to
look into the matter, for if it is worth anyone’s while
to take so much trouble, there must be something
in it.”
“But what is it?”
887
TheAdventure of the Three Gables
“I was going to tell you when we had this comic
interlude. Here is Mrs. Maberley’s note. If you care
to come with me we will wire her and go out at
once.”
Dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes [I read]:
I have had a succession of strange in-
cidents occur to me in connection with
this house, and I should much value
your advice. You would ﬁnd me at
home any time to-morrow. The house
is within a short walk of the Weald Sta-
tion. I believe that my late husband,
Mortimer Maberley, was one of your
early clients.
— Yours faithfully,
Mary Maberley
The address was “The Three Gables, Harrow
Weald.”
“So that’s that!” said Holmes. “And now, if you
can spare the time, Watson, we will get upon our
way.”
A short railway journey, and a shorter drive,
brought us to the house, a brick and timber villa,
standing in its own acre of undeveloped grassland.
Three small projections above the upper windows
made a feeble attempt to justify its name. Behind
was a grove of melancholy, half-grown pines, and
the whole aspect of the place was poor and de-
pressing. None the less, we found the house to be
well furnished, and the lady who received us was
a most engaging elderly person, who bore every
mark of reﬁnement and culture.
“I remember your husband well, madam,” said
Holmes, “though it is some years since he used my
services in some triﬂing matter.”
“Probably you would be more familiar with the
name of my son Douglas.”
Holmes looked at her with great interest.
“Dear me! Are you the mother of Douglas
Maberley? I knew him slightly. But of course all
London knew him. What a magniﬁcent creature he
was! Where is he now?”
“Dead, Mr. Holmes, dead! He was attache at
Rome, and he died there of pneumonia last month.”
“I am sorry. One could not connect death with
such a man. I have never known anyone so vitally
alive. He lived intensely—every ﬁbre of him!”
“Too intensely, Mr. Holmes. That was the ruin
of him. You remember him as he was—debonair
and splendid. You did not see the moody, morose,
brooding creature into which he developed. Hisheart was broken. In a single month I seemed to
see my gallant boy turn into a worn-out cynical
man.”
“A love affair—a woman?”
“Or a ﬁend. Well, it was not to talk of my poor
lad that I asked you to come, Mr. Holmes.”
“Dr. Watson and I are at your service.”
“There have been some very strange happen-
ings. I have been in this house more than a year
now, and as I wished to lead a retired life I have
seen little of my neighbours. Three days ago I had
a call from a man who said that he was a house
agent. He said that this house would exactly suit a
client of his, and that if I would part with it money
would be no object. It seemed to me very strange
as there are several empty houses on the market
which appear to be equally eligible, but naturally I
was interested in what he said. I therefore named a
price which was ﬁve hundred pounds more than I
gave. He at once closed with the offer, but added
that his client desired to buy the furniture as well
and would I put a price upon it. Some of this fur-
niture is from my old home, and it is, as you see,
very good, so that I named a good round sum. To
this also he at once agreed. I had always wanted
to travel, and the bargain was so good a one that it
really seemed that I should be my own mistress for
the rest of my life.
“Yesterday the man arrived with the agreement
all drawn out. Luckily I showed it to Mr. Sutro, my
lawyer, who lives in Harrow. He said to me, ‘This
is a very strange document. Are you aware that if
you sign it you could not legally take anything out
of the house—not even your own private posses-
sions?’ When the man came again in the evening
I pointed this out, and I said that I meant only to
sell the furniture.
“ ‘No, no, everything,’ said he.
“ ‘But my clothes? My jewels?’
“ ‘Well, well, some concession might be made
for your personal effects. But nothing shall go out
of the house unchecked. My client is a very liberal
man, but he has his fads and his own way of doing
things. It is everything or nothing with him.’
“ ‘Then it must be nothing,’ said I. And there
the matter was left, but the whole thing seemed to
me to be so unusual that I thought—”
Here we had a very extraordinary interruption.
Holmes raised his hand for silence. Then he
strode across the room, ﬂung open the door, and
dragged in a great gaunt woman whom he had
seized by the shoulder. She entered with ungainly
struggle like some huge awkward chicken, torn,
squawking, out of its coop.
888
“Leave me alone! What are you a-doin’ of?” she
screeched.
“Why, Susan, what is this?”
“Well, ma’am, I was comin’ in to ask if the visi-
tors was stayin’ for lunch when this man jumped
out at me.”
“I have been listening to her for the last ﬁve
minutes, but did not wish to interrupt your most
interesting narrative. Just a little wheezy, Susan,
are you not? You breathe too heavily for that kind
of work.”
Susan turned a sulky but amazed face upon her
captor. “Who be you, anyhow, and what right have
you a-pullin’ me about like this?”
“It was merely that I wished to ask a question
in your presence. Did you, Mrs. Maberley, mention
to anyone that you were going to write to me and
consult me?”
“No, Mr. Holmes, I did not.”
“Who posted your letter?”
“Susan did.”
“Exactly. Now, Susan, to whom was it that you
wrote or sent a message to say that your mistress
was asking advice from me?”
“It’s a lie. I sent no message.”
“Now, Susan, wheezy people may not live long,
you know. It’s a wicked thing to tell ﬁbs. Whom
did you tell?”
“Susan!” cried her mistress, “I believe you are
a bad, treacherous woman. I remember now that I
saw you speaking to someone over the hedge.”
“That was my own business,” said the woman
sullenly.
“Suppose I tell you that it was Barney Stockdale
to whom you spoke?” said Holmes.
“Well, if you know, what do you want to ask
for?”
“I was not sure, but I know now. Well now,
Susan, it will be worth ten pounds to you if you
will tell me who is at the back of Barney.”
“Someone that could lay down a thousand
pounds for every ten you have in the world.”
“So, a rich man? No; you smiled—a rich woman.
Now we have got so far, you may as well give the
name and earn the tenner.”
“I’ll see you in hell ﬁrst.”
“Oh, Susan! Language!”
“I am clearing out of here. I’ve had enough
of you all. I’ll send for my box to-morrow.” She
ﬂounced for the door.“Good-bye, Susan. Paregoric is the stuff. . .
Now,” he continued, turning suddenly from lively
to severe when the door had closed behind the
ﬂushed and angry woman, “this gang means busi-
ness. Look how close they play the game. Your
letter to me had the 10P . M. postmark. And yet
Susan passes the word to Barney. Barney has time
to go to his employer and get instructions; he
or she—I incline to the latter from Susan’s grin
when she thought I had blundered—forms a plan.
Black Steve is called in, and I am warned off by
eleven o’clock next morning. That’s quick work,
you know.”
“But what do they want?”
“Yes, that’s the question. Who had the house
before you?”
“A retired sea captain called Ferguson.”
“Anything remarkable about him?”
“Not that ever I heard of.”
“I was wondering whether he could have buried
something. Of course, when people bury treasure
nowadays they do it in the Post-Ofﬁce bank. But
there are always some lunatics about. It would
be a dull world without them. At ﬁrst I thought
of some buried valuable. But why, in that case,
should they want your furniture? You don’t hap-
pen to have a Raphael or a ﬁrst folio Shakespeare
without knowing it?”
“No, I don’t think I have anything rarer than a
Crown Derby tea-set.”
“That would hardly justify all this mystery. Be-
sides, why should they not openly state what they
want? If they covet your tea-set, they can surely
offer a price for it without buying you out, lock,
stock, and barrel. No, as I read it, there is some-
thing which you do not know that you have, and
which you would not give up if you did know.”
“That is how I read it,” said I.
“Dr. Watson agrees, so that settles it.”
“Well, Mr. Holmes, what can it be?”
“Let us see whether by this purely mental anal-
ysis we can get it to a ﬁner point. You have been in
this house a year.”
“Nearly two.”
“All the better. During this long period no one
wants anything from you. Now suddenly within
three or four days you have urgent demands. What
would you gather from that?”
“It can only mean,” said I, “that the object, what-
ever it may be, has only just come into the house.”
“Settled once again,” said Holmes. “Now, Mrs.
Maberley, has any object just arrived?”
889
TheAdventure of the Three Gables
“No, I have bought nothing new this year.”
“Indeed! That is very remarkable. Well, I think
we had best let matters develop a little further un-
til we have clearer data. Is that lawyer of yours a
capable man?”
“Mr. Sutro is most capable.”
“Have you another maid, or was the fair Susan,
who has just banged your front door, alone?”
“I have a young girl.”
“Try and get Sutro to spend a night or two in
the house. You might possibly want protection.”
“Against whom?”
“Who knows? The matter is certainly obscure.
If I can’t ﬁnd what they are after, I must approach
the matter from the other end and try to get at
the principal. Did this house-agent man give any
address?”
“Simply his card and occupation. Haines-
Johnson, Auctioneer and Valuer.”
“I don’t think we shall ﬁnd him in the directory.
Honest business men don’t conceal their place of
business. Well, you will let me know any fresh
development. I have taken up your case, and you
may rely upon it that I shall see it through.”
As we passed through the hall Holmes’s eyes,
which missed nothing, lighted upon several trunks
and cases which were piled in a corner. The labels
shone out upon them.
“ ‘Milano.’ ‘Lucerne.’ These are from Italy.”
“They are poor Douglas’s things.”
“You have not unpacked them? How long have
you had them?”
“They arrived last week.”
“But you said—why, surely this might be the
missing link. How do we know that there is not
something of value there?”
“There could not possibly be, Mr. Holmes. Poor
Douglas had only his pay and a small annuity.
What could he have of value?”
Holmes was lost in thought.
“Delay no longer, Mrs. Maberley,” he said at last.
“Have these things taken upstairs to your bedroom.
Examine them as soon as possible and see what
they contain. I will come to-morrow and hear your
report.”
It was quite evident that The Three Gables was
under very close surveillance, for as we came round
the high hedge at the end of the lane there was the
negro prize-ﬁghter standing in the shadow. Wecame on him quite suddenly, and a grim and men-
acing ﬁgure he looked in that lonely place. Holmes
clapped his hand to his pocket.
“Lookin’ for your gun, Masser Holmes?”
“No, for my scent-bottle, Steve.”
“You are funny, Masser Holmes, ain’t you?”
“It won’t be funny for you, Steve, if I get after
you. I gave you fair warning this morning.”
“Well, Masser Holmes, I done gone think over
what you said, and I don’t want no more talk about
that affair of Masser Perkins. S’pose I can help you,
Masser Holmes, I will.”
“Well, then, tell me who is behind you on this
job.”
“So help me the Lord! Masser Holmes, I told
you the truth before. I don’t know. My boss Barney
gives me orders and that’s all.”
“Well, just bear in mind, Steve, that the lady
in that house, and everything under that roof, is
under my protection. Don’t forget it.”
“All right, Masser Holmes. I’ll remember.”
“I’ve got him thoroughly frightened for his own
skin, Watson,” Holmes remarked as we walked on.
“I think he would double-cross his employer if he
knew who he was. It was lucky I had some knowl-
edge of the Spencer John crowd, and that Steve was
one of them. Now, Watson, this is a case for Lang-
dale Pike, and I am going to see him now. When I
get back I may be clearer in the matter.”
I saw no more of Holmes during the day, but I
could well imagine how he spent it, for Langdale
Pike was his human book of reference upon all mat-
ters of social scandal. This strange, languid creature
spent his waking hours in the bow window of a St.
James’s Street club and was the receiving-station
as well as the transmitter for all the gossip of the
metropolis. He made, it was said, a four-ﬁgure
income by the paragraphs which he contributed
every week to the garbage papers which cater to
an inquisitive public. If ever, far down in the tur-
bid depths of London life, there was some strange
swirl or eddy, it was marked with automatic exact-
ness by this human dial upon the surface. Holmes
discreetly helped Langdale to knowledge, and on
occasion was helped in turn.
When I met my friend in his room early next
morning, I was conscious from his bearing that
all was well, but none the less a most unpleasant
surprise was awaiting us. It took the shape of the
following telegram:
890
Please come out at once. Client’s house
burgled in the night. Police in posses-
sion.
— Sutro .
Holmes whistled. “The drama has come to a
crisis, and quicker than I had expected. There is
a great driving-power at the back of this business,
Watson, which does not surprise me after what I
have heard. This Sutro, of course, is her lawyer. I
made a mistake, I fear, in not asking you to spend
the night on guard. This fellow has clearly proved
a broken reed. Well, there is nothing for it but
another journey to Harrow Weald.”
We found The Three Gables a very different
establishment to the orderly household of the pre-
vious day. A small group of idlers had assembled
at the garden gate, while a couple of constables
were examining the windows and the geranium
beds. Within we met a gray old gentleman, who
introduced himself as the lawyer, together with a
bustling, rubicund inspector, who greeted Holmes
as an old friend.
“Well, Mr. Holmes, no chance for you in this
case, I’m afraid. Just a common, ordinary burglary,
and well within the capacity of the poor old police.
No experts need apply.”
“I am sure the case is in very good hands,” said
Holmes. “Merely a common burglary, you say?”
“Quite so. We know pretty well who the men
are and where to ﬁnd them. It is that gang of Bar-
ney Stockdale, with the big nigger in it—they’ve
been seen about here.”
“Excellent! What did they get?”
“Well, they don’t seem to have got much. Mrs.
Maberley was chloroformed and the house was—
Ah! here is the lady herself.”
Our friend of yesterday, looking very pale and
ill, had entered the room, leaning upon a little
maidservant.
“You gave me good advice, Mr. Holmes,” said
she, smiling ruefully. “Alas, I did not take it! I
did not wish to trouble Mr. Sutro, and so I was
unprotected.”
“I only heard of it this morning,” the lawyer
explained.
“Mr. Holmes advised me to have some friend in
the house. I neglected his advice, and I have paid
for it.”
“You look wretchedly ill,” said Holmes. “Per-
haps you are hardly equal to telling me what oc-
curred.”“It is all here,” said the inspector, tapping a
bulky notebook.
“Still, if the lady is not too exhausted—”
“There is really so little to tell. I have no doubt
that wicked Susan had planned an entrance for
them. They must have known the house to an inch.
I was conscious for a moment of the chloroform
rag which was thrust over my mouth, but I have no
notion how long I may have been senseless. When
I woke, one man was at the bedside and another
was rising with a bundle in his hand from among
my son’s baggage, which was partially opened and
littered over the ﬂoor. Before he could get away I
sprang up and seized him.”
“You took a big risk,” said the inspector.
“I clung to him, but he shook me off, and the
other may have struck me, for I can remember no
more. Mary the maid heard the noise and began
screaming out of the window. That brought the
police, but the rascals had got away.”
“What did they take?”
“Well, I don’t think there is anything of value
missing. I am sure there was nothing in my son’s
trunks.”
“Did the men leave no clue?”
“There was one sheet of paper which I may
have torn from the man that I grasped. It was ly-
ing all crumpled on the ﬂoor. It is in my son’s
handwriting.”
“Which means that it is not of much use,” said
the inspector. “Now if it had been in the bur-
glar’s—”
“Exactly,” said Holmes. “What rugged common
sense! None the less, I should be curious to see it.”
The inspector drew a folded sheet of foolscap
from his pocketbook.
“I never pass anything, however triﬂing,” said
he with some pomposity. “That is my advice to
you, Mr. Holmes. In twenty-ﬁve years’ experience I
have learned my lesson. There is always the chance
of ﬁnger-marks or something.”
Holmes inspected the sheet of paper.
“What do you make of it, Inspector?”
“Seems to be the end of some queer novel, so
far as I can see.”
“It may certainly prove to be the end of a queer
tale,” said Holmes. “You have noticed the num-
ber on the top of the page. It is two hundred and
forty-ﬁve. Where are the odd two hundred and
forty-four pages?”
“Well, I suppose the burglars got those. Much
good may it do them!”
891
TheAdventure of the Three Gables
“It seems a queer thing to break into a house in
order to steal such papers as that. Does it suggest
anything to you, Inspector?”
“Yes, sir, it suggests that in their hurry the ras-
cals just grabbed at what came ﬁrst to hand. I wish
them joy of what they got.”
“Why should they go to my son’s things?”
asked Mrs. Maberley.
“Well, they found nothing valuable downstairs,
so they tried their luck upstairs. That is how I read
it. What do you make of it, Mr. Holmes?”
“I must think it over, Inspector. Come to the
window, Watson.” Then, as we stood together, he
read over the fragment of paper. It began in the
middle of a sentence and ran like this:
“. . . face bled considerably from the cuts
and blows, but it was nothing to the bleed-
ing of his heart as he saw that lovely face,
the face for which he had been prepared to
sacriﬁce his very life, looking out at his
agony and humiliation. She smiled—yes,
by Heaven! she smiled, like the heartless
ﬁend she was, as he looked up at her. It
was at that moment that love died and hate
was born. Man must live for something. If
it is not for your embrace, my lady, then
it shall surely be for your undoing and my
complete revenge.”
“Queer grammar!” said Holmes with a smile as
he handed the paper back to the inspector. “Did
you notice how the ‘he’ suddenly changed to ‘my’?
The writer was so carried away by his own story
that he imagined himself at the supreme moment
to be the hero.”
“It seemed mighty poor stuff,” said the inspec-
tor as he replaced it in his book. “What! are you
off, Mr. Holmes?”
“I don’t think there is anything more for me to
do now that the case is in such capable hands. By
the way, Mrs. Maberley, did you say you wished to
travel?”
“It has always been my dream, Mr. Holmes.”
“Where would you like to go—Cairo, Madeira,
the Riviera?”
“Oh, if I had the money I would go round the
world.”
“Quite so. Round the world. Well, good-
morning. I may drop you a line in the evening.” As
we passed the window I caught a glimpse of the
inspector’s smile and shake of the head. “These
clever fellows have always a touch of madness.”
That was what I read in the inspector’s smile.“Now, Watson, we are at the last lap of our little
journey,” said Holmes when we were back in the
roar of central London once more. “I think we had
best clear the matter up at once, and it would be
well that you should come with me, for it is safer
to have a witness when you are dealing with such
a lady as Isadora Klein.”
We had taken a cab and were speeding to some
address in Grosvenor Square. Holmes had been
sunk in thought, but he roused himself suddenly.
“By the way, Watson, I suppose you see it all
clearly?”
“No, I can’t say that I do. I only gather that
we are going to see the lady who is behind all this
mischief.”
“Exactly! But does the name Isadora Klein
convey nothing to you? She was, of course, the
celebrated beauty. There was never a woman to
touch her. She is pure Spanish, the real blood of
the masterful Conquistadors, and her people have
been leaders in Pernambuco for generations. She
married the aged German sugar king, Klein, and
presently found herself the richest as well as the
most lovely widow upon earth. Then there was an
interval of adventure when she pleased her own
tastes. She had several lovers, and Douglas Maber-
ley, one of the most striking men in London, was
one of them. It was by all accounts more than an
adventure with him. He was not a society butterﬂy
but a strong, proud man who gave and expected all.
But she is the ‘belle dame sans merci’ of ﬁction. When
her caprice is satisﬁed the matter is ended, and if
the other party in the matter can’t take her word
for it she knows how to bring it home to him.”
“Then that was his own story—”
“Ah! you are piecing it together now. I hear that
she is about to marry the young Duke of Lomond,
who might almost be her son. His Grace’s ma
might overlook the age, but a big scandal would be
a different matter, so it is imperative— Ah! here we
are.”
It was one of the ﬁnest corner-houses of the
West End. A machine-like footman took up our
cards and returned with word that the lady was
not at home. “Then we shall wait until she is,” said
Holmes cheerfully.
The machine broke down.
“Not at home means not at home to you,” said
the footman.
“Good,” Holmes answered. “That means that
we shall not have to wait. Kindly give this note to
your mistress.”
892
He scribbled three or four words upon a sheet
of his notebook, folded it, and handed it to the
man.
“What did you say, Holmes?” I asked.
“I simply wrote: ‘Shall it be the police, then?’ I
think that should pass us in.”
It did—with amazing celerity. A minute later
we were in an Arabian Nights drawing-room, vast
and wonderful, in a half gloom, picked out with an
occasional pink electric light. The lady had come,
I felt, to that time of life when even the proudest
beauty ﬁnds the half light more welcome. She rose
from a settee as we entered: tall, queenly, a perfect
ﬁgure, a lovely mask-like face, with two wonderful
Spanish eyes which looked murder at us both.
“What is this intrusion—and this insulting mes-
sage?” she asked, holding up the slip of paper.
“I need not explain, madame. I have too much
respect for your intelligence to do so—though I
confess that intelligence has been surprisingly at
fault of late.”
“How so, sir?”
“By supposing that your hired bullies could
frighten me from my work. Surely no man would
take up my profession if it were not that danger
attracts him. It was you, then, who forced me to
examine the case of young Maberley.”
“I have no idea what you are talking about.
What have I to do with hired bullies?”
Holmes turned away wearily.
“Yes, I have underrated your intelligence. Well,
good-afternoon!”
“Stop! Where are you going?”
“To Scotland Yard.”
We had not got halfway to the door before she
had overtaken us and was holding his arm. She
had turned in a moment from steel to velvet.
“Come and sit down, gentlemen. Let us talk
this matter over. I feel that I may be frank with you,
Mr. Holmes. You have the feelings of a gentleman.
How quick a woman’s instinct is to ﬁnd it out. I
will treat you as a friend.”
“I cannot promise to reciprocate, madame. I
am not the law, but I represent justice so far as my
feeble powers go. I am ready to listen, and then I
will tell you how I will act.”
“No doubt it was foolish of me to threaten a
brave man like yourself.”
“What was really foolish, madame, is that you
have placed yourself in the power of a band of
rascals who may blackmail or give you away.”“No, no! I am not so simple. Since I have
promised to be frank, I may say that no one, save
Barney Stockdale and Susan, his wife, have the least
idea who their employer is. As to them, well, it
is not the ﬁrst—” She smiled and nodded with a
charming coquettish intimacy.
“I see. You’ve tested them before.”
“They are good hounds who run silent.”
“Such hounds have a way sooner or later of
biting the hand that feeds them. They will be ar-
rested for this burglary. The police are already after
them.”
“They will take what comes to them. That is
what they are paid for. I shall not appear in the
matter.”
“Unless I bring you into it.”
“No, no, you would not. You are a gentleman.
It is a woman’s secret.”
“In the ﬁrst place, you must give back this
manuscript.”
She broke into a ripple of laughter and walked
to the ﬁreplace. There was a calcined mass which
she broke up with the poker. “Shall I give this
back?” she asked. So roguish and exquisite did she
look as she stood before us with a challenging smile
that I felt of all Holmes’s criminals this was the one
whom he would ﬁnd it hardest to face. However,
he was immune from sentiment.
“That seals your fate,” he said coldly. “You are
very prompt in your actions, madame, but you have
overdone it on this occasion.”
She threw the poker down with a clatter.
“How hard you are!” she cried. “May I tell you
the whole story?”
“I fancy I could tell it to you.”
“But you must look at it with my eyes, Mr.
Holmes. You must realize it from the point of
view of a woman who sees all her life’s ambition
about to be ruined at the last moment. Is such a
woman to be blamed if she protects herself?”
“The original sin was yours.”
“Yes, yes! I admit it. He was a dear boy, Dou-
glas, but it so chanced that he could not ﬁt into
my plans. He wanted marriage—marriage, Mr.
Holmes—with a penniless commoner. Nothing less
would serve him. Then he became pertinacious.
Because I had given he seemed to think that I still
must give, and to him only. It was intolerable. At
last I had to make him realize it.”
“By hiring rufﬁans to beat him under your own
window.”
893
TheAdventure of the Three Gables
“You do indeed seem to know everything. Well,
it is true. Barney and the boys drove him away,
and were, I admit, a little rough in doing so. But
what did he do then? Could I have believed that a
gentleman would do such an act? He wrote a book
in which he described his own story. I, of course,
was the wolf; he the lamb. It was all there, under
different names, of course; but who in all London
would have failed to recognize it? What do you say
to that, Mr. Holmes?”
“Well, he was within his rights.”
“It was as if the air of Italy had got into his
blood and brought with it the old cruel Italian
spirit. He wrote to me and sent me a copy of his
book that I might have the torture of anticipation.
There were two copies, he said—one for me, one
for his publisher.”
“How did you know the publisher’s had not
reached him?”
“I knew who his publisher was. It is not his only
novel, you know. I found out that he had not heard
from Italy. Then came Douglas’s sudden death.
So long as that other manuscript was in the world
there was no safety for me. Of course, it must beamong his effects, and these would be returned to
his mother. I set the gang at work. One of them
got into the house as servant. I wanted to do the
thing honestly. I really and truly did. I was ready
to buy the house and everything in it. I offered any
price she cared to ask. I only tried the other way
when everything else had failed. Now, Mr. Holmes,
granting that I was too hard on Douglas—and, God
knows, I am sorry for it!—what else could I do with
my whole future at stake?”
Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
“Well, well,” said he, “I suppose I shall have to
compound a felony as usual. How much does it
cost to go round the world in ﬁrst-class style?”
The lady stared in amazement.
“Could it be done on ﬁve thousand pounds?”
“Well, I should think so, indeed!”
“Very good. I think you will sign me a check
for that, and I will see that it comes to Mrs. Maber-
ley. You owe her a little change of air. Meantime,
lady”—he wagged a cautionary foreﬁnger—“have
a care! Have a care! You can’t play with edged
tools forever without cutting those dainty hands.”
894
The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire

Holmes had read carefully a note which
the last post had brought him. Then, with
the dry chuckle which was his nearest ap-
proach to a laugh, he tossed it over to me.
“For a mixture of the modern and the mediae-
val, of the practical and of the wildly fanciful, I
think this is surely the limit,” said he. “What do
you make of it, Watson?”
I read as follows:
46, Old Jewry,
Nov. 19th.
ReVampires
Sir:
Our client, Mr. Robert Ferguson, of
Ferguson and Muirhead, tea brokers, of
Mincing Lane, has made some inquiry
from us in a communication of even
date concerning vampires. As our ﬁrm
specializes entirely upon the assessment
of machinery the matter hardly comes
within our purview, and we have there-
fore recommended Mr. Ferguson to call
upon you and lay the matter before you.
We have not forgotten your successful
action in the case of Matilda Briggs.
We are, sir,
— Faithfully yours,
Morrison , Morrison ,and Dodd.
per E. J. C.
“Matilda Briggs was not the name of a young
woman, Watson,” said Holmes in a reminiscent
voice. “It was a ship which is associated with the
giant rat of Sumatra, a story for which the world
is not yet prepared. But what do we know about
vampires? Does it come within our purview either?
Anything is better than stagnation, but really we
seem to have been switched on to a Grimms’ fairy
tale. Make a long arm, Watson, and see what V has
to say.”
I leaned back and took down the great index
volume to which he referred. Holmes balanced it
on his knee, and his eyes moved slowly and lov-
ingly over the record of old cases, mixed with the
accumulated information of a lifetime.
“Voyage of the Gloria Scott ,” he read. “That was
a bad business. I have some recollection that you
made a record of it, Watson, though I was unable to
congratulate you upon the result. Victor Lynch, the
forger. Venomous lizard or gila. Remarkable case,
that! Vittoria, the circus belle. Vanderbilt and the
Yeggman. Vipers. Vigor, the Hammersmith wonder.
Hullo! Hullo! Good old index. You can’t beat it.Listen to this, Watson. Vampirism in Hungary. And
again, Vampires in Transylvania.” He turned over
the pages with eagerness, but after a short intent
perusal he threw down the great book with a snarl
of disappointment.
“Rubbish, Watson, rubbish! What have we to
do with walking corpses who can only be held in
their grave by stakes driven through their hearts?
It’s pure lunacy.”
“But surely,” said I, “the vampire was not nec-
essarily a dead man? A living person might have
the habit. I have read, for example, of the old suck-
ing the blood of the young in order to retain their
youth.”
“You are right, Watson. It mentions the legend
in one of these references. But are we to give seri-
ous attention to such things? This agency stands
ﬂat-footed upon the ground, and there it must re-
main. The world is big enough for us. No ghosts
need apply. I fear that we cannot take Mr. Robert
Ferguson very seriously. Possibly this note may be
from him and may throw some light upon what is
worrying him.”
He took up a second letter which had lain un-
noticed upon the table while he had been absorbed
with the ﬁrst. This he began to read with a smile of
amusement upon his face which gradually faded
away into an expression of intense interest and con-
centration. When he had ﬁnished he sat for some
little time lost in thought with the letter dangling
from his ﬁngers. Finally, with a start, he aroused
himself from his reverie.
“Cheeseman’s, Lamberley. Where is Lamberley,
Watson?”
“It is in Sussex, south of Horsham.”
“Not very far, eh? And Cheeseman’s?”
“I know that country, Holmes. It is full of old
houses which are named after the men who built
them centuries ago. You get Odley’s and Harvey’s
and Carriton’s—the folk are forgotten but their
names live in their houses.
“Precisely,” said Holmes coldly. It was one of
the peculiarities of his proud, self-contained na-
ture that though he docketed any fresh information
very quietly and accurately in his brain, he sel-
dom made any acknowledgment to the giver. “I
rather fancy we shall know a good deal more about
Cheeseman’s, Lamberley, before we are through.
The letter is, as I had hoped, from Robert Ferguson.
By the way, he claims acquaintance with you.”
“With me!”
“You had better read it.”
897
TheAdventure of the Sussex Vampire
He handed the letter across. It was headed with
the address quoted.
Dear Mr. Holmes [it said]:
I have been recommended to you by
my lawyers, but indeed the matter is so
extraordinarily delicate that it is most
difﬁcult to discuss. It concerns a friend
for whom I am acting. This gentleman
married some ﬁve years ago a Peruvian
lady, the daughter of a Peruvian mer-
chant, whom he had met in connection
with the importation of nitrates. The
lady was very beautiful, but the fact of
her foreign birth and of her alien reli-
gion always caused a separation of in-
terests and of feelings between husband
and wife, so that after a time his love
may have cooled towards her and he
may have come to regard their union as
a mistake. He felt there were sides of
her character which he could never ex-
plore or understand. This was the more
painful as she was as loving a wife as
a man could have—to all appearance
absolutely devoted.
Now for the point which I will make
more plain when we meet. Indeed, this
note is merely to give you a general idea
of the situation and to ascertain whether
you would care to interest yourself in
the matter. The lady began to show
some curious traits quite alien to her
ordinarily sweet and gentle disposition.
The gentleman had been married twice
and he had one son by the ﬁrst wife.
This boy was now ﬁfteen, a very charm-
ing and affectionate youth, though un-
happily injured through an accident in
childhood. Twice the wife was caught
in the act of assaulting this poor lad in
the most unprovoked way. Once she
struck him with a stick and left a great
weal on his arm.
This was a small matter, however, com-
pared with her conduct to her own
child, a dear boy just under one year
of age. On one occasion about a month
ago this child had been left by its nurse
for a few minutes. A loud cry from
the baby, as of pain, called the nurse
back. As she ran into the room she
saw her employer, the lady, leaning over
the baby and apparently biting his neck.
There was a small wound in the neckfrom which a stream of blood had es-
caped. The nurse was so horriﬁed that
she wished to call the husband, but the
lady implored her not to do so and ac-
tually gave her ﬁve pounds as a price
for her silence. No explanation was ever
given, and for the moment the matter
was passed over.
It left, however, a terrible impression
upon the nurse’s mind, and from that
time she began to watch her mistress
closely and to keep a closer guard upon
the baby, whom she tenderly loved. It
seemed to her that even as she watched
the mother, so the mother watched her,
and that every time she was compelled
to leave the baby alone the mother was
waiting to get at it. Day and night
the nurse covered the child, and day
and night the silent, watchful mother
seemed to be lying in wait as a wolf
waits for a lamb. It must read most in-
credible to you, and yet I beg you to
take it seriously, for a child’s life and a
man’s sanity may depend upon it.
At last there came one dreadful day
when the facts could no longer be con-
cealed from the husband. The nurse’s
nerve had given way; she could stand
the strain no longer, and she made a
clean breast of it all to the man. To him
it seemed as wild a tale as it may now
seem to you. He knew his wife to be a
loving wife, and, save for the assaults
upon her stepson, a loving mother. Why,
then, should she wound her own dear
little baby? He told the nurse that she
was dreaming, that her suspicions were
those of a lunatic, and that such libels
upon her mistress were not to be tol-
erated. While they were talking a sud-
den cry of pain was heard. Nurse and
master rushed together to the nursery.
Imagine his feelings, Mr. Holmes, as
he saw his wife rise from a kneeling
position beside the cot and saw blood
upon the child’s exposed neck and upon
the sheet. With a cry of horror, he
turned his wife’s face to the light and
saw blood all round her lips. It was
she—she beyond all question—who had
drunk the poor baby’s blood.
So the matter stands. She is now con-
ﬁned to her room. There has been no
explanation. The husband is half de-
898
mented. He knows, and I know, little of
vampirism beyond the name. We had
thought it was some wild tale of for-
eign parts. And yet here in the very
heart of the English Sussex—well, all
this can be discussed with you in the
morning. Will you see me? Will you use
your great powers in aiding a distracted
man? If so, kindly wire to Ferguson,
Cheeseman’s, Lamberley, and I will be
at your rooms by ten o’clock.
— Yours faithfully,
Robert Ferguson .
P . S. I believe your friend Watson
played Rugby for Blackheath when I
was three-quarter for Richmond. It is
the only personal introduction which I
can give.
“Of course I remembered him,” said I as I laid
down the letter. “Big Bob Ferguson, the ﬁnest three-
quarter Richmond ever had. He was always a good-
natured chap. It’s like him to be so concerned over
a friend’s case.”
Holmes looked at me thoughtfully and shook
his head.
“I never get your limits, Watson,” said he.
“There are unexplored possibilities about you. Take
a wire down, like a good fellow. ‘Will examine your
case with pleasure.’ ”
“Your case!”
“We must not let him think that this agency is
a home for the weak-minded. Of course it is his
case. Send him that wire and let the matter rest till
morning.”
Promptly at ten o’clock next morning Fergu-
son strode into our room. I had remembered him
as a long, slab-sided man with loose limbs and a
ﬁne turn of speed which had carried him round
many an opposing back. There is surely nothing
in life more painful than to meet the wreck of a
ﬁne athlete whom one has known in his prime. His
great frame had fallen in, his ﬂaxen hair was scanty,
and his shoulders were bowed. I fear that I roused
corresponding emotions in him.
“Hullo, Watson,” said he, and his voice was still
deep and hearty. “You don’t look quite the man you
did when I threw you over the ropes into the crowd
at the Old Deer Park. I expect I have changed a bit
also. But it’s this last day or two that has aged me.
I see by your telegram, Mr. Holmes, that it is no
use my pretending to be anyone’s deputy.”
“It is simpler to deal direct,” said Holmes.“Of course it is. But you can imagine how difﬁ-
cult it is when you are speaking of the one woman
whom you are bound to protect and help. What
can I do? How am I to go to the police with such a
story? And yet the kiddies have got to be protected.
Is it madness, Mr. Holmes? Is it something in the
blood? Have you any similar case in your experi-
ence? For God’s sake, give me some advice, for I
am at my wit’s end.”
“Very naturally, Mr. Ferguson. Now sit here
and pull yourself together and give me a few clear
answers. I can assure you that I am very far from
being at my wit’s end, and that I am conﬁdent we
shall ﬁnd some solution. First of all, tell me what
steps you have taken. Is your wife still near the
children?”
“We had a dreadful scene. She is a most loving
woman, Mr. Holmes. If ever a woman loved a man
with all her heart and soul, she loves me. She was
cut to the heart that I should have discovered this
horrible, this incredible, secret. She would not even
speak. She gave no answer to my reproaches, save
to gaze at me with a sort of wild, despairing look in
her eyes. Then she rushed to her room and locked
herself in. Since then she has refused to see me. She
has a maid who was with her before her marriage,
Dolores by name—a friend rather than a servant.
She takes her food to her.”
“Then the child is in no immediate danger?”
“Mrs. Mason, the nurse, has sworn that she will
not leave it night or day. I can absolutely trust her.
I am more uneasy about poor little Jack, for, as I
told you in my note, he has twice been assaulted
by her.”
“But never wounded?”
“No, she struck him savagely. It is the more
terrible as he is a poor little inoffensive cripple.”
Ferguson’s gaunt features softened as he spoke
of his boy. “You would think that the dear lad’s
condition would soften anyone’s heart. A fall in
childhood and a twisted spine, Mr. Holmes. But
the dearest, most loving heart within.”
Holmes had picked up the letter of yesterday
and was reading it over. “What other inmates are
there in your house, Mr. Ferguson?”
“Two servants who have not been long with us.
One stable-hand, Michael, who sleeps in the house.
My wife, myself, my boy Jack, baby, Dolores, and
Mrs. Mason. That is all.”
“I gather that you did not know your wife well
at the time of your marriage?”
“I had only known her a few weeks.”
“How long had this maid Dolores been with
her?”
899
TheAdventure of the Sussex Vampire
“Some years.”
“Then your wife’s character would really be
better known by Dolores than by you?”
“Yes, you may say so.”
Holmes made a note.
“I fancy,” said he, “that I may be of more use at
Lamberley than here. It is eminently a case for per-
sonal investigation. If the lady remains in her room,
our presence could not annoy or inconvenience her.
Of course, we would stay at the inn.”
Ferguson gave a gesture of relief.
“It is what I hoped, Mr. Holmes. There is an
excellent train at two from Victoria if you could
come.”
“Of course we could come. There is a lull at
present. I can give you my undivided energies.
Watson, of course, comes with us. But there are one
or two points upon which I wish to be very sure
before I start. This unhappy lady, as I understand
it, has appeared to assault both the children, her
own baby and your little son?”
“That is so.”
“But the assaults take different forms, do they
not? She has beaten your son.”
“Once with a stick and once very savagely with
her hands.”
“Did she give no explanation why she struck
him?”
“None save that she hated him. Again and again
she said so.”
“Well, that is not unknown among stepmothers.
A posthumous jealousy, we will say. Is the lady
jealous by nature?”
“Yes, she is very jealous—jealous with all the
strength of her ﬁery tropical love.”
“But the boy—he is ﬁfteen, I understand, and
probably very developed in mind, since his body
has been circumscribed in action. Did he give you
no explanation of these assaults?”
“No, he declared there was no reason.”
“Were they good friends at other times?”
“No, there was never any love between them.”
“Yet you say he is affectionate?”
“Never in the world could there be so devoted
a son. My life is his life. He is absorbed in what I
say or do.”
Once again Holmes made a note. For some time
he sat lost in thought.“No doubt you and the boy were great com-
rades before this second marriage. You were
thrown very close together, were you not?”
“Very much so.”
“And the boy, having so affectionate a nature,
was devoted, no doubt, to the memory of his
mother?”
“Most devoted.”
“He would certainly seem to be a most inter-
esting lad. There is one other point about these
assaults. Were the strange attacks upon the baby
and the assaults upon your son at the same pe-
riod?”
“In the ﬁrst case it was so. It was as if some
frenzy had seized her, and she had vented her rage
upon both. In the second case it was only Jack who
suffered. Mrs. Mason had no complaint to make
about the baby.”
“That certainly complicates matters.”
“I don’t quite follow you, Mr. Holmes.”
“Possibly not. One forms provisional theories
and waits for time or fuller knowledge to explode
them. A bad habit, Mr. Ferguson, but human na-
ture is weak. I fear that your old friend here has
given an exaggerated view of my scientiﬁc meth-
ods. However, I will only say at the present stage
that your problem does not appear to me to be
insoluble, and that you may expect to ﬁnd us at
Victoria at two o’clock.”
It was evening of a dull, foggy November day
when, having left our bags at the Chequers, Lam-
berley, we drove through the Sussex clay of a long
winding lane and ﬁnally reached the isolated and
ancient farmhouse in which Ferguson dwelt. It
was a large, straggling building, very old in the
centre, very new at the wings with towering Tudor
chimneys and a lichen-spotted, high-pitched roof
of Horsham slabs. The doorsteps were worn into
curves, and the ancient tiles which lined the porch
were marked with the rebus of a cheese and a man
after the original builder. Within, the ceilings were
corrugated with heavy oaken beams, and the un-
even ﬂoors sagged into sharp curves. An odour
of age and decay pervaded the whole crumbling
building.
There was one very large central room into
which Ferguson led us. Here, in a huge old-
fashioned ﬁreplace with an iron screen behind it
dated 1670 , there blazed and spluttered a splendid
log ﬁre.
The room, as I gazed round, was a most singular
mixture of dates and of places. The half-panelled
900
walls may well have belonged to the original yeo-
man farmer of the seventeenth century. They were
ornamented, however, on the lower part by a line
of well-chosen modern water-colours; while above,
where yellow plaster took the place of oak, there
was hung a ﬁne collection of South American uten-
sils and weapons, which had been brought, no
doubt, by the Peruvian lady upstairs. Holmes rose,
with that quick curiosity which sprang from his
eager mind, and examined them with some care.
He returned with his eyes full of thought.
“Hullo!” he cried. “Hullo!”
A spaniel had lain in a basket in the corner. It
came slowly forward towards its master, walking
with difﬁculty. Its hind legs moved irregularly and
its tail was on the ground. It licked Ferguson’s
hand.
“What is it, Mr. Holmes?”
“The dog. What’s the matter with it?”
“That’s what puzzled the vet. A sort of paraly-
sis. Spinal meningitis, he thought. But it is passing.
He’ll be all right soon—won’t you, Carlo?”
A shiver of assent passed through the drooping
tail. The dog’s mournful eyes passed from one of
us to the other. He knew that we were discussing
his case.
“Did it come on suddenly?”
“In a single night.”
“How long ago?”
“It may have been four months ago.”
“Very remarkable. Very suggestive.”
“What do you see in it, Mr. Holmes?”
“A conﬁrmation of what I had already thought.”
“For God’s sake, what do you think, Mr.
Holmes? It may be a mere intellectual puzzle to
you, but it is life and death to me! My wife a
would-be murderer—my child in constant danger!
Don’t play with me, Mr. Holmes. It is too terribly
serious.”
The big Rugby three-quarter was trembling all
over. Holmes put his hand soothingly upon his
arm.
“I fear that there is pain for you, Mr. Ferguson,
whatever the solution may be,” said he. “I would
spare you all I can. I cannot say more for the in-
stant, but before I leave this house I hope I may
have something deﬁnite.”
“Please God you may! If you will excuse me,
gentlemen, I will go up to my wife’s room and see
if there has been any change.”He was away some minutes, during which
Holmes resumed his examination of the curiosi-
ties upon the wall. When our host returned it was
clear from his downcast face that he had made no
progress. He brought with him a tall, slim, brown-
faced girl.
“The tea is ready, Dolores,” said Ferguson. “See
that your mistress has everything she can wish.”
“She verra ill,” cried the girl, looking with in-
dignant eyes at her master. “She no ask for food.
She verra ill. She need doctor. I frightened stay
alone with her without doctor.”
Ferguson looked at me with a question in his
eyes.
“I should be so glad if I could be of use.”
“Would your mistress see Dr. Watson?”
“I take him. I no ask leave. She needs doctor.”
“Then I’ll come with you at once.”
I followed the girl, who was quivering with
strong emotion, up the staircase and down an an-
cient corridor. At the end was an iron-clamped
and massive door. It struck me as I looked at it
that if Ferguson tried to force his way to his wife
he would ﬁnd it no easy matter. The girl drew a
key from her pocket, and the heavy oaken planks
creaked upon their old hinges. I passed in and she
swiftly followed, fastening the door behind her.
On the bed a woman was lying who was clearly
in a high fever. She was only half conscious, but as
I entered she raised a pair of frightened but beauti-
ful eyes and glared at me in apprehension. Seeing
a stranger, she appeared to be relieved and sank
back with a sigh upon the pillow. I stepped up to
her with a few reassuring words, and she lay still
while I took her pulse and temperature. Both were
high, and yet my impression was that the condition
was rather that of mental and nervous excitement
than of any actual seizure.
“She lie like that one day, two day. I ’fraid she
die,” said the girl.
The woman turned her ﬂushed and handsome
face towards me.
“Where is my husband?”
“He is below and would wish to see you.”
“I will not see him. I will not see him.” Then
she seemed to wander off into delirium. “A ﬁend!
A ﬁend! Oh, what shall I do with this devil?”
“Can I help you in any way?”
“No. No one can help. It is ﬁnished. All is
destroyed. Do what I will, all is destroyed.”
The woman must have some strange delusion. I
could not see honest Bob Ferguson in the character
of ﬁend or devil.
901
TheAdventure of the Sussex Vampire
“Madame,” I said, “your husband loves you
dearly. He is deeply grieved at this happening.”
Again she turned on me those glorious eyes.
“He loves me. Yes. But do I not love him? Do
I not love him even to sacriﬁce myself rather than
break his dear heart? That is how I love him. And
yet he could think of me—he could speak of me
so.”
“He is full of grief, but he cannot understand.”
“No, he cannot understand. But he should
trust.”
“Will you not see him?” I suggested.
“No, no, I cannot forget those terrible words nor
the look upon his face. I will not see him. Go now.
You can do nothing for me. Tell him only one thing.
I want my child. I have a right to my child. That is
the only message I can send him.” She turned her
face to the wall and would say no more.
I returned to the room downstairs, where Fer-
guson and Holmes still sat by the ﬁre. Ferguson
listened moodily to my account of the interview.
“How can I send her the child?” he said. “How
do I know what strange impulse might come upon
her? How can I ever forget how she rose from be-
side it with its blood upon her lips?” He shuddered
at the recollection. “The child is safe with Mrs.
Mason, and there he must remain.”
A smart maid, the only modern thing which
we had seen in the house, had brought in some
tea. As she was serving it the door opened and a
youth entered the room. He was a remarkable lad,
pale-faced and fair-haired, with excitable light blue
eyes which blazed into a sudden ﬂame of emotion
and joy as they rested upon his father. He rushed
forward and threw his arms round his neck with
the abandon of a loving girl.
“Oh, daddy,” he cried, “I did not know that you
were due yet. I should have been here to meet you.
Oh, I am so glad to see you!”
Ferguson gently disengaged himself from the
embrace with some little show of embarrassment.
“Dear old chap,” said he, patting the ﬂaxen
head with a very tender hand. “I came early be-
cause my friends, Mr. Holmes and Dr. Watson,
have been persuaded to come down and spend
an evening with us.”
“Is that Mr. Holmes, the detective?”
“Yes.”
The youth looked at us with a very penetrating
and, as it seemed to me, unfriendly gaze.“What about your other child, Mr. Ferguson?”
asked Holmes. “Might we make the acquaintance
of the baby?”
“Ask Mrs. Mason to bring baby down,” said
Ferguson. The boy went off with a curious, sham-
bling gait which told my surgical eyes that he was
suffering from a weak spine. Presently he returned,
and behind him came a tall, gaunt woman bear-
ing in her arms a very beautiful child, dark-eyed,
golden-haired, a wonderful mixture of the Saxon
and the Latin. Ferguson was evidently devoted to
it, for he took it into his arms and fondled it most
tenderly.
“Fancy anyone having the heart to hurt him,”
he muttered as he glanced down at the small, angry
red pucker upon the cherub throat.
It was at this moment that I chanced to glance
at Holmes and saw a most singular intentness in
his expression. His face was as set as if it had been
carved out of old ivory, and his eyes, which had
glanced for a moment at father and child, were now
ﬁxed with eager curiosity upon something at the
other side of the room. Following his gaze I could
only guess that he was looking out through the
window at the melancholy, dripping garden. It is
true that a shutter had half closed outside and ob-
structed the view, but none the less it was certainly
at the window that Holmes was ﬁxing his concen-
trated attention. Then he smiled, and his eyes came
back to the baby. On its chubby neck there was this
small puckered mark. Without speaking, Holmes
examined it with care. Finally he shook one of the
dimpled ﬁsts which waved in front of him.
“Good-bye, little man. You have made a strange
start in life. Nurse, I should wish to have a word
with you in private.”
He took her aside and spoke earnestly for a few
minutes. I only heard the last words, which were:
“Your anxiety will soon, I hope, be set at rest.” The
woman, who seemed to be a sour, silent kind of
creature, withdrew with the child.
“What is Mrs. Mason like?” asked Holmes.
“Not very prepossessing externally, as you can
see, but a heart of gold, and devoted to the child.”
“Do you like her, Jack?” Holmes turned sud-
denly upon the boy. His expressive mobile face
shadowed over, and he shook his head.
“Jacky has very strong likes and dislikes,” said
Ferguson, putting his arm round the boy. “Luckily
I am one of his likes.”
The boy cooed and nestled his head upon his
father’s breast. Ferguson gently disengaged him.
902
“Run away, little Jacky,” said he, and he watched
his son with loving eyes until he disappeared.
“Now, Mr. Holmes,” he continued when the boy
was gone, “I really feel that I have brought you
on a fool’s errand, for what can you possibly do
save give me your sympathy? It must be an exceed-
ingly delicate and complex affair from your point
of view.”
“It is certainly delicate,” said my friend with
an amused smile, “but I have not been struck up
to now with its complexity. It has been a case for
intellectual deduction, but when this original intel-
lectual deduction is conﬁrmed point by point by
quite a number of independent incidents, then the
subjective becomes objective and we can say conﬁ-
dently that we have reached our goal. I had, in fact,
reached it before we left Baker Street, and the rest
has merely been observation and conﬁrmation.”
Ferguson put his big hand to his furrowed fore-
head.
“For heaven’s sake, Holmes,” he said hoarsely;
“if you can see the truth in this matter, do not keep
me in suspense. How do I stand? What shall I do?
I care nothing as to how you have found your facts
so long as you have really got them.”
“Certainly I owe you an explanation, and you
shall have it. But you will permit me to handle
the matter in my own way? Is the lady capable of
seeing us, Watson?”
“She is ill, but she is quite rational.”
“Very good. It is only in her presence that we
can clear the matter up. Let us go up to her.”
“She will not see me,” cried Ferguson.
“Oh, yes, she will,” said Holmes. He scribbled a
few lines upon a sheet of paper. “You at least have
the entree, Watson. Will you have the goodness to
give the lady this note?”
I ascended again and handed the note to Do-
lores, who cautiously opened the door. A minute
later I heard a cry from within, a cry in which joy
and surprise seemed to be blended. Dolores looked
out.
“She will see them. She will leesten,” said she.
At my summons Ferguson and Holmes came
up. As we entered the room Ferguson took a step
or two towards his wife, who had raised herself in
the bed, but she held out her hand to repulse him.
He sank into an armchair, while Holmes seated
himself beside him, after bowing to the lady, who
looked at him with wide-eyed amazement.
“I think we can dispense with Dolores,” said
Holmes. “Oh, very well, madame, if you wouldrather she stayed I can see no objection. Now, Mr.
Ferguson, I am a busy man with many calls, and my
methods have to be short and direct. The swiftest
surgery is the least painful. Let me ﬁrst say what
will ease your mind. Your wife is a very good, a
very loving, and a very ill-used woman.”
Ferguson sat up with a cry of joy.
“Prove that, Mr. Holmes, and I am your debtor
forever.”
“I will do so, but in doing so I must wound you
deeply in another direction.”
“I care nothing so long as you clear my wife.
Everything on earth is insigniﬁcant compared to
that.”
“Let me tell you, then, the train of reasoning
which passed through my mind in Baker Street.
The idea of a vampire was to me absurd. Such
things do not happen in criminal practice in Eng-
land. And yet your observation was precise. You
had seen the lady rise from beside the child’s cot
with the blood upon her lips.”
“I did.”
“Did it not occur to you that a bleeding wound
may be sucked for some other purpose than to
draw the blood from it? Was there not a queen in
English history who sucked such a wound to draw
poison from it?”
“Poison!”
“A South American household. My instinct felt
the presence of those weapons upon the wall before
my eyes ever saw them. It might have been other
poison, but that was what occurred to me. When I
saw that little empty quiver beside the small bird-
bow, it was just what I expected to see. If the child
were pricked with one of those arrows dipped in
curare or some other devilish drug, it would mean
death if the venom were not sucked out.
“And the dog! If one were to use such a poison,
would one not try it ﬁrst in order to see that it had
not lost its power? I did not foresee the dog, but
at least I understand him and he ﬁtted into my
reconstruction.
“Now do you understand? Your wife feared
such an attack. She saw it made and saved the
child’s life, and yet she shrank from telling you all
the truth, for she knew how you loved the boy and
feared lest it break your heart.”
“Jacky!”
“I watched him as you fondled the child just
now. His face was clearly reﬂected in the glass
of the window where the shutter formed a back-
ground. I saw such jealousy, such cruel hatred, as I
have seldom seen in a human face.”
903
TheAdventure of the Sussex Vampire
“My Jacky!”
“You have to face it, Mr. Ferguson. It is the
more painful because it is a distorted love, a mani-
acal exaggerated love for you, and possibly for his
dead mother, which has prompted his action. His
very soul is consumed with hatred for this splendid
child, whose health and beauty are a contrast to his
own weakness.”
“Good God! It is incredible!”
“Have I spoken the truth, madame?”
The lady was sobbing, with her face buried in
the pillows. Now she turned to her husband.
“How could I tell you, Bob? I felt the blow it
would be to you. It was better that I should wait
and that it should come from some other lips than
mine. When this gentleman, who seems to have
powers of magic, wrote that he knew all, I was
glad.”
“I think a year at sea would be my prescrip-
tion for Master Jacky,” said Holmes, rising from his
chair. “Only one thing is still clouded, madame.
We can quite understand your attacks upon Master
Jacky. There is a limit to a mother’s patience. But
how did you dare to leave the child these last two
days?”
“I had told Mrs. Mason. She knew.”“Exactly. So I imagined.”
Ferguson was standing by the bed, choking, his
hands outstretched and quivering.
“This, I fancy, is the time for our exit, Watson,”
said Holmes in a whisper. “If you will take one
elbow of the too faithful Dolores, I will take the
other. There, now,” he added as he closed the door
behind him, “I think we may leave them to settle
the rest among themselves.”
I have only one further note of this case. It is
the letter which Holmes wrote in ﬁnal answer to
that with which the narrative begins. It ran thus:
Baker Street,
Nov. 21st.
ReVampires
Sir:
Referring to your letter of the 19th, I
beg to state that I have looked into the
inquiry of your client, Mr. Robert Fer-
guson, of Ferguson and Muirhead, tea
brokers, of Mincing Lane, and that the
matter has been brought to a satisfac-
tory conclusion. With thanks for your
recommendation, I am, sir,
— Faithfully yours,
Sherlock Holmes .
904
The Adventure of the Three Garridebs

It may have been a comedy, or it may have
been a tragedy. It cost one man his rea-
son, it cost me a blood-letting, and it cost
yet another man the penalties of the law.
Yet there was certainly an element of comedy. Well,
you shall judge for yourselves.
I remember the date very well, for it was in the
same month that Holmes refused a knighthood for
services which may perhaps some day be described.
I only refer to the matter in passing, for in my po-
sition of partner and conﬁdant I am obliged to be
particularly careful to avoid any indiscretion. I re-
peat, however, that this enables me to ﬁx the date,
which was the latter end of June, 1902 , shortly after
the conclusion of the South African War. Holmes
had spent several days in bed, as was his habit from
time to time, but he emerged that morning with a
long foolscap document in his hand and a twinkle
of amusement in his austere gray eyes.
“There is a chance for you to make some money,
friend Watson,” said he. “Have you ever heard the
name of Garrideb?”
I admitted that I had not.
“Well, if you can lay your hand upon a Garrideb,
there’s money in it.”
“Why?”
“Ah, that’s a long story—rather a whimsical one,
too. I don’t think in all our explorations of human
complexities we have ever come upon anything
more singular. The fellow will be here presently for
cross-examination, so I won’t open the matter up
till he comes. But, meanwhile, that’s the name we
want.”
The telephone directory lay on the table beside
me, and I turned over the pages in a rather hopeless
quest. But to my amazement there was this strange
name in its due place. I gave a cry of triumph.
“Here you are, Holmes! Here it is!”
Holmes took the book from my hand.
“ ‘Garrideb, N.,’ ” he read, “ ‘ 136Little Ryder
Street, W.’ Sorry to disappoint you, my dear Wat-
son, but this is the man himself. That is the address
upon his letter. We want another to match him.”
Mrs. Hudson had come in with a card upon a
tray. I took it up and glanced at it.
“Why, here it is!” I cried in amazement. “This
is a different initial. John Garrideb, Counsellor at
Law, Moorville, Kansas, U. S. A.”
Holmes smiled as he looked at the card. “I am
afraid you must make yet another effort, Watson,”
said he. “This gentleman is also in the plot already,
though I certainly did not expect to see him thismorning. However, he is in a position to tell us a
good deal which I want to know.”
A moment later he was in the room. Mr. John
Garrideb, Counsellor at Law, was a short, powerful
man with the round, fresh, clean-shaven face char-
acteristic of so many American men of affairs. The
general effect was chubby and rather childlike, so
that one received the impression of quite a young
man with a broad set smile upon his face. His eyes,
however, were arresting. Seldom in any human
head have I seen a pair which bespoke a more in-
tense inward life, so bright were they, so alert, so
responsive to every change of thought. His accent
was American, but was not accompanied by any
eccentricity of speech.
“Mr. Holmes?” he asked, glancing from one to
the other. “Ah, yes! Your pictures are not unlike
you, sir, if I may say so. I believe you have had
a letter from my namesake, Mr. Nathan Garrideb,
have you not?”
“Pray sit down,” said Sherlock Holmes. “We
shall, I fancy, have a good deal to discuss.” He
took up his sheets of foolscap. “You are, of course,
the Mr. John Garrideb mentioned in this document.
But surely you have been in England some time?”
“Why do you say that, Mr. Holmes?” I seemed
to read sudden suspicion in those expressive eyes.
“Your whole outﬁt is English.”
Mr. Garrideb forced a laugh. “I’ve read of your
tricks, Mr. Holmes, but I never thought I would be
the subject of them. Where do you read that?”
“The shoulder cut of your coat, the toes of your
boots—could anyone doubt it?”
“Well, well, I had no idea I was so obvious a
Britisher. But business brought me over here some
time ago, and so, as you say, my outﬁt is nearly all
London. However, I guess your time is of value,
and we did not meet to talk about the cut of my
socks. What about getting down to that paper you
hold in your hand?”
Holmes had in some way rufﬂed our visitor,
whose chubby face had assumed a far less amiable
expression.
“Patience! Patience, Mr. Garrideb!” said my
friend in a soothing voice. “Dr. Watson would tell
you that these little digressions of mine sometimes
prove in the end to have some bearing on the mat-
ter. But why did Mr. Nathan Garrideb not come
with you?”
“Why did he ever drag you into it at all?” asked
our visitor with a sudden outﬂame of anger. “What
in thunder had you to do with it? Here was a bit of
professional business between two gentlemen, and
one of them must needs call in a detective! I saw
907
TheAdventure of the Three Garridebs
him this morning, and he told me this fool-trick he
had played me, and that’s why I am here. But I feel
bad about it, all the same.”
“There was no reﬂection upon you, Mr. Gar-
rideb. It was simply zeal upon his part to gain
your end—an end which is, I understand, equally
vital for both of you. He knew that I had means
of getting information, and, therefore, it was very
natural that he should apply to me.”
Our visitor’s angry face gradually cleared.
“Well, that puts it different,” said he. “When I
went to see him this morning and he told me he
had sent to a detective, I just asked for your address
and came right away. I don’t want police butting
into a private matter. But if you are content just
to help us ﬁnd the man, there can be no harm in
that.”
“Well, that is just how it stands,” said Holmes.
“And now, sir, since you are here, we had best have
a clear account from your own lips. My friend here
knows nothing of the details.”
Mr. Garrideb surveyed me with not too friendly
a gaze.
“Need he know?” he asked.
“We usually work together.”
“Well, there’s no reason it should be kept a se-
cret. I’ll give you the facts as short as I can make
them. If you came from Kansas I would not need to
explain to you who Alexander Hamilton Garrideb
was. He made his money in real estate, and after-
wards in the wheat pit at Chicago, but he spent it
in buying up as much land as would make one of
your counties, lying along the Arkansas River, west
of Fort Dodge. It’s grazing-land and lumber-land
and arable-land and mineralized-land, and just ev-
ery sort of land that brings dollars to the man that
owns it.
“He had no kith nor kin—or, if he had, I never
heard of it. But he took a kind of pride in the
queerness of his name. That was what brought us
together. I was in the law at Topeka, and one day
I had a visit from the old man, and he was tickled
to death to meet another man with his own name.
It was his pet fad, and he was dead set to ﬁnd
out if there were any more Garridebs in the world.
‘Find me another!’ said he. I told him I was a busy
man and could not spend my life hiking round the
world in search of Garridebs. ‘None the less,’ said
he, ‘that is just what you will do if things pan out
as I planned them.’ I thought he was joking, but
there was a powerful lot of meaning in the words,
as I was soon to discover.“For he died within a year of saying them, and
he left a will behind him. It was the queerest will
that has ever been ﬁled in the State of Kansas. His
property was divided into three parts, and I was to
have one on condition that I found two Garridebs
who would share the remainder. It’s ﬁve million
dollars for each if it is a cent, but we can’t lay a
ﬁnger on it until we all three stand in a row.
“It was so big a chance that I just let my le-
gal practice slide and I set forth looking for Gar-
ridebs. There is not one in the United States. I
went through it, sir, with a ﬁne-toothed comb and
never a Garrideb could I catch. Then I tried the
old country. Sure enough there was the name in
the London telephone directory. I went after him
two days ago and explained the whole matter to
him. But he is a lone man, like myself, with some
women relations, but no men. It says three adult
men in the will. So you see we still have a vacancy,
and if you can help to ﬁll it we will be very ready
to pay your charges.”
“Well, Watson,” said Holmes with a smile, “I
said it was rather whimsical, did I not? I should
have thought, sir, that your obvious way was to
advertise in the agony columns of the papers.”
“I have done that, Mr. Holmes. No replies.”
“Dear me! Well, it is certainly a most curious lit-
tle problem. I may take a glance at it in my leisure.
By the way, it is curious that you should have come
from Topeka. I used to have a correspondent—he is
dead now—old Dr. Lysander Starr, who was mayor
in1890 .”
“Good old Dr. Starr!” said our visitor. “His
name is still honoured. Well, Mr. Holmes, I suppose
all we can do is to report to you and let you know
how we progress. I reckon you will hear within
a day or two.” With this assurance our American
bowed and departed.
Holmes had lit his pipe, and he sat for some
time with a curious smile upon his face.
“Well?” I asked at last.
“I am wondering, Watson—just wondering!”
“At what?”
Holmes took his pipe from his lips.
“I was wondering, Watson, what on earth could
be the object of this man in telling us such a rig-
marole of lies. I nearly asked him so—for there
are times when a brutal frontal attack is the best
policy—but I judged it better to let him think he
had fooled us. Here is a man with an English coat
frayed at the elbow and trousers bagged at the
knee with a year’s wear, and yet by this document
908
and by his own account he is a provincial Ameri-
can lately landed in London. There have been no
advertisements in the agony columns. You know
that I miss nothing there. They are my favourite
covert for putting up a bird, and I would never have
overlooked such a cock pheasant as that. I never
knew a Dr. Lysander Starr, of Topeka. Touch him
where you would he was false. I think the fellow
is really an American, but he has worn his accent
smooth with years of London. What is his game,
then, and what motive lies behind this preposter-
ous search for Garridebs? It’s worth our attention,
for, granting that the man is a rascal, he is certainly
a complex and ingenious one. We must now ﬁnd
out if our other correspondent is a fraud also. Just
ring him up, Watson.”
I did so, and heard a thin, quavering voice at
the other end of the line.
“Yes, yes, I am Mr. Nathan Garrideb. Is Mr.
Holmes there? I should very much like to have a
word with Mr. Holmes.”
My friend took the instrument and I heard the
usual syncopated dialogue.
“Yes, he has been here. I understand that you
don’t know him. . . . How long? . . . Only two
days! . . . Yes, yes, of course, it is a most captivat-
ing prospect. Will you be at home this evening?
I suppose your namesake will not be there? . . .
Very good, we will come then, for I would rather
have a chat without him. . . . Dr. Watson will come
with me. . . . I understand from your note that you
did not go out often. . . . Well, we shall be round
about six. You need not mention it to the American
lawyer. . . . Very good. Good-bye!”
It was twilight of a lovely spring evening, and
even Little Ryder Street, one of the smaller offshoots
from the Edgware Road, within a stone-cast of old
Tyburn Tree of evil memory, looked golden and
wonderful in the slanting rays of the setting sun.
The particular house to which we were directed
was a large, old-fashioned, Early Georgian ediﬁce,
with a ﬂat brick face broken only by two deep bay
windows on the ground ﬂoor. It was on this ground
ﬂoor that our client lived, and, indeed, the low win-
dows proved to be the front of the huge room in
which he spent his waking hours. Holmes pointed
as we passed to the small brass plate which bore
the curious name.
“Up some years, Watson,” he remarked, indi-
cating its discoloured surface. “It’s his real name,
anyhow, and that is something to note.”
The house had a common stair, and there were a
number of names painted in the hall, some indicat-
ing ofﬁces and some private chambers. It was not acollection of residential ﬂats, but rather the abode
of Bohemian bachelors. Our client opened the door
for us himself and apologized by saying that the
woman in charge left at four o’clock. Mr. Nathan
Garrideb proved to be a very tall, loose-jointed,
round-backed person, gaunt and bald, some sixty-
odd years of age. He had a cadaverous face, with
the dull dead skin of a man to whom exercise was
unknown. Large round spectacles and a small pro-
jecting goat’s beard combined with his stooping
attitude to give him an expression of peering cu-
riosity. The general effect, however, was amiable,
though eccentric.
The room was as curious as its occupant. It
looked like a small museum. It was both broad
and deep, with cupboards and cabinets all round,
crowded with specimens, geological and anatom-
ical. Cases of butterﬂies and moths ﬂanked each
side of the entrance. A large table in the centre
was littered with all sorts of debris, while the tall
brass tube of a powerful microscope bristled up
among them. As I glanced round I was surprised
at the universality of the man’s interests. Here was
a case of ancient coins. There was a cabinet of
ﬂint instruments. Behind his central table was a
large cupboard of fossil bones. Above was a line of
plaster skulls with such names as “Neanderthal,”
“Heidelberg,” “Cro-Magnon” printed beneath them.
It was clear that he was a student of many subjects.
As he stood in front of us now, he held a piece of
chamois leather in his right hand with which he
was polishing a coin.
“Syracusan—of the best period,” he explained,
holding it up. “They degenerated greatly towards
the end. At their best I hold them supreme, though
some prefer the Alexandrian school. You will ﬁnd
a chair here, Mr. Holmes. Pray allow me to clear
these bones. And you, sir—ah, yes, Dr. Watson—if
you would have the goodness to put the Japanese
vase to one side. You see round me my little in-
terests in life. My doctor lectures me about never
going out, but why should I go out when I have
so much to hold me here? I can assure you that
the adequate cataloguing of one of those cabinets
would take me three good months.”
Holmes looked round him with curiosity.
“But do you tell me that you never go out?” he
said.
“Now and again I drive down to Sotheby’s or
Christie’s. Otherwise I very seldom leave my room.
I am not too strong, and my researches are very
absorbing. But you can imagine, Mr. Holmes, what
a terriﬁc shock—pleasant but terriﬁc—it was for
me when I heard of this unparalleled good fortune.
It only needs one more Garrideb to complete the
909
TheAdventure of the Three Garridebs
matter, and surely we can ﬁnd one. I had a brother,
but he is dead, and female relatives are disquali-
ﬁed. But there must surely be others in the world. I
had heard that you handled strange cases, and that
was why I sent to you. Of course, this American
gentleman is quite right, and I should have taken
his advice ﬁrst, but I acted for the best.”
“I think you acted very wisely indeed,” said
Holmes. “But are you really anxious to acquire an
estate in America?”
“Certainly not, sir. Nothing would induce me to
leave my collection. But this gentleman has assured
me that he will buy me out as soon as we have es-
tablished our claim. Five million dollars was the
sum named. There are a dozen specimens in the
market at the present moment which ﬁll gaps in
my collection, and which I am unable to purchase
for want of a few hundred pounds. Just think what
I could do with ﬁve million dollars. Why, I have
the nucleus of a national collection. I shall be the
Hans Sloane of my age.”
His eyes gleamed behind his great spectacles. It
was very clear that no pains would be spared by
Mr. Nathan Garrideb in ﬁnding a namesake.
“I merely called to make your acquaintance, and
there is no reason why I should interrupt your stud-
ies,” said Holmes. “I prefer to establish personal
touch with those with whom I do business. There
are few questions I need ask, for I have your very
clear narrative in my pocket, and I ﬁlled up the
blanks when this American gentleman called. I
understand that up to this week you were unaware
of his existence.”
“That is so. He called last Tuesday.”
“Did he tell you of our interview to-day?”
“Yes, he came straight back to me. He had been
very angry.”
“Why should he be angry?”
“He seemed to think it was some reﬂection on
his honour. But he was quite cheerful again when
he returned.”
“Did he suggest any course of action?”
“No, sir, he did not.”
“Has he had, or asked for, any money from
you?”
“No, sir, never!”
“You see no possible object he has in view?”
“None, except what he states.”
“Did you tell him of our telephone appoint-
ment?”
“Yes, sir, I did.”Holmes was lost in thought. I could see that he
was puzzled.
“Have you any articles of great value in your
collection?”
“No, sir. I am not a rich man. It is a good
collection, but not a very valuable one.”
“You have no fear of burglars?”
“Not the least.”
“How long have you been in these rooms?”
“Nearly ﬁve years.”
Holmes’s cross-examination was interrupted by
an imperative knocking at the door. No sooner had
our client unlatched it than the American lawyer
burst excitedly into the room.
“Here you are!” he cried, waving a paper over
his head. “I thought I should be in time to get you.
Mr. Nathan Garrideb, my congratulations! You are
a rich man, sir. Our business is happily ﬁnished
and all is well. As to you, Mr. Holmes, we can only
say we are sorry if we have given you any useless
trouble.”
He handed over the paper to our client, who
stood staring at a marked advertisement. Holmes
and I leaned forward and read it over his shoulder.
This is how it ran:
Howard Garrideb
Constructor of Agricultural Machinery
Binders, reapers, steam and hand plows, drills,
harrows, farmers’ carts, buckboards, and all other
appliances.
Estimates for Artesian Wells
Apply Grosvenor Buildings, Aston
“Glorious!” gasped our host. “That makes our third
man.”
“I had opened up inquiries in Birmingham,”
said the American, “and my agent there has sent
me this advertisement from a local paper. We must
hustle and put the thing through. I have written to
this man and told him that you will see him in his
ofﬁce to-morrow afternoon at four o’clock.”
“You want meto see him?”
“What do you say, Mr. Holmes? Don’t you think
it would be wiser? Here am I, a wandering Ameri-
can with a wonderful tale. Why should he believe
what I tell him? But you are a Britisher with solid
references, and he is bound to take notice of what
you say. I would go with you if you wished, but
I have a very busy day to-morrow, and I could
always follow you if you are in any trouble.”
“Well, I have not made such a journey for
years.”
910
“It is nothing, Mr. Garrideb. I have ﬁgured out
our connections. You leave at twelve and should
be there soon after two. Then you can be back the
same night. All you have to do is to see this man,
explain the matter, and get an afﬁdavit of his exis-
tence. By the Lord!” he added hotly, “considering
I’ve come all the way from the centre of America, it
is surely little enough if you go a hundred miles in
order to put this matter through.”
“Quite so,” said Holmes. “I think what this
gentleman says is very true.”
Mr. Nathan Garrideb shrugged his shoulders
with a disconsolate air. “Well, if you insist I shall
go,” said he. “It is certainly hard for me to refuse
you anything, considering the glory of hope that
you have brought into my life.”
“Then that is agreed,” said Holmes, “and no
doubt you will let me have a report as soon as you
can.”
“I’ll see to that,” said the American. “Well,” he
added, looking at his watch, “I’ll have to get on.
I’ll call to-morrow, Mr. Nathan, and see you off to
Birmingham. Coming my way, Mr. Holmes? Well,
then, good-bye, and we may have good news for
you to-morrow night.”
I noticed that my friend’s face cleared when the
American left the room, and the look of thoughtful
perplexity had vanished.
“I wish I could look over your collection, Mr.
Garrideb,” said he. “In my profession all sorts of
odd knowledge comes useful, and this room of
yours is a storehouse of it.”
Our client shone with pleasure and his eyes
gleamed from behind his big glasses.
“I had always heard, sir, that you were a very
intelligent man,” said he. “I could take you round
now if you have the time.”
“Unfortunately, I have not. But these specimens
are so well labelled and classiﬁed that they hardly
need your personal explanation. If I should be able
to look in to-morrow, I presume that there would
be no objection to my glancing over them?”
“None at all. You are most welcome. The place
will, of course, be shut up, but Mrs. Saunders is in
the basement up to four o’clock and would let you
in with her key.”
Well, I happen to be clear to-morrow afternoon.
If you would say a word to Mrs. Saunders it would
be quite in order. By the way, who is your house-
agent?”
Our client was amazed at the sudden question.“Holloway and Steele, in the Edgware Road.
But why?”
“I am a bit of an archaeologist myself when it
comes to houses,” said Holmes, laughing. “I was
wondering if this was Queen Anne or Georgian.”
“Georgian, beyond doubt.”
“Really. I should have thought a little earlier.
However, it is easily ascertained. Well, good-bye,
Mr. Garrideb, and may you have every success in
your Birmingham journey.”
The house-agent’s was close by, but we found
that it was closed for the day, so we made our way
back to Baker Street. It was not till after dinner that
Holmes reverted to the subject.
“Our little problem draws to a close,” said he.
“No doubt you have outlined the solution in your
own mind.”
“I can make neither head nor tail of it.”
“The head is surely clear enough and the tail
we should see to-morrow. Did you notice nothing
curious about that advertisement?”
“I saw that the word ‘plough’ was misspelt.”
“Oh, you did notice that, did you? Come, Wat-
son, you improve all the time. Yes, it was bad
English but good American. The printer had set
it up as received. Then the buckboards. That is
American also. And artesian wells are commoner
with them than with us. It was a typical Ameri-
can advertisement, but purporting to be from an
English ﬁrm. What do you make of that?”
“I can only suppose that this American lawyer
put it in himself. What his object was I fail to
understand.”
“Well, there are alternative explanations. Any-
how, he wanted to get this good old fossil up to
Birmingham. That is very clear. I might have told
him that he was clearly going on a wild-goose
chase, but, on second thoughts, it seemed better
to clear the stage by letting him go. To-morrow,
Watson—well, to-morrow will speak for itself.”
Holmes was up and out early. When he re-
turned at lunchtime I noticed that his face was very
grave.
“This is a more serious matter than I had ex-
pected, Watson,” said he. “It is fair to tell you so,
though I know it will only be an additional reason
to you for running your head into danger. I should
know my Watson by now. But there is danger, and
you should know it.”
“Well, it is not the ﬁrst we have shared, Holmes.
I hope it may not be the last. What is the particular
danger this time?”
“We are up against a very hard case. I have
identiﬁed Mr. John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law.
911
TheAdventure of the Three Garridebs
He is none other than ‘Killer’ Evans, of sinister and
murderous reputation.”
“I fear I am none the wiser.”
“Ah, it is not part of your profession to carry
about a portable Newgate Calendar in your mem-
ory. I have been down to see friend Lestrade at the
Yard. There may be an occasional want of imagina-
tive intuition down there, but they lead the world
for thoroughness and method. I had an idea that
we might get on the track of our American friend in
their records. Sure enough, I found his chubby face
smiling up at me from the rogues’ portrait gallery.
‘James Winter, alias Morecroft, alias Killer Evans,’
was the inscription below.” Holmes drew an en-
velope from his pocket. “I scribbled down a few
points from his dossier: Aged forty-four. Native
of Chicago. Known to have shot three men in the
States. Escaped from penitentiary through political
inﬂuence. Came to London in 1893 . Shot a man
over cards in a night-club in the Waterloo Road
in January, 1895 . Man died, but he was shown to
have been the aggressor in the row. Dead man was
identiﬁed as Rodger Prescott, famous as forger and
coiner in Chicago. Killer Evans released in 1901 .
Has been under police supervision since, but so far
as known has led an honest life. Very dangerous
man, usually carries arms and is prepared to use
them. That is our bird, Watson—a sporting bird, as
you must admit.”
“But what is his game?”
“Well, it begins to deﬁne itself. I have been to
the house-agent’s. Our client, as he told us, has
been there ﬁve years. It was unlet for a year before
then. The previous tenant was a gentleman at large
named Waldron. Waldron’s appearance was well
remembered at the ofﬁce. He had suddenly van-
ished and nothing more been heard of him. He was
a tall, bearded man with very dark features. Now,
Prescott, the man whom Killer Evans had shot, was,
according to Scotland Yard, a tall, dark man with
a beard. As a working hypothesis, I think we may
take it that Prescott, the American criminal, used
to live in the very room which our innocent friend
now devotes to his museum. So at last we get a
link, you see.”
“And the next link?”
“Well, we must go now and look for that.”
He took a revolver from the drawer and handed
it to me.
“I have my old favourite with me. If our Wild
West friend tries to live up to his nickname, we
must be ready for him. I’ll give you an hour for asiesta, Watson, and then I think it will be time for
our Ryder Street adventure.”
It was just four o’clock when we reached the
curious apartment of Nathan Garrideb. Mrs. Saun-
ders, the caretaker, was about to leave, but she had
no hesitation in admitting us, for the door shut with
a spring lock, and Holmes promised to see that all
was safe before we left. Shortly afterwards the outer
door closed, her bonnet passed the bow window,
and we knew that we were alone in the lower ﬂoor
of the house. Holmes made a rapid examination of
the premises. There was one cupboard in a dark
corner which stood out a little from the wall. It
was behind this that we eventually crouched while
Holmes in a whisper outlined his intentions.
“He wanted to get our amiable friend out of his
room—that is very clear, and, as the collector never
went out, it took some planning to do it. The whole
of this Garrideb invention was apparently for no
other end. I must say, Watson, that there is a certain
devilish ingenuity about it, even if the queer name
of the tenant did give him an opening which he
could hardly have expected. He wove his plot with
remarkable cunning.”
“But what did he want?”
“Well, that is what we are here to ﬁnd out. It
has nothing whatever to do with our client, so far
as I can read the situation. It is something con-
nected with the man he murdered—the man who
may have been his confederate in crime. There
is some guilty secret in the room. That is how I
read it. At ﬁrst I thought our friend might have
something in his collection more valuable than he
knew—something worth the attention of a big crim-
inal. But the fact that Rodger Prescott of evil mem-
ory inhabited these rooms points to some deeper
reason. Well, Watson, we can but possess our souls
in patience and see what the hour may bring.”
That hour was not long in striking. We crouched
closer in the shadow as we heard the outer door
open and shut. Then came the sharp, metallic snap
of a key, and the American was in the room. He
closed the door softly behind him, took a sharp
glance around him to see that all was safe, threw
off his overcoat, and walked up to the central table
with the brisk manner of one who knows exactly
what he has to do and how to do it. He pushed
the table to one side, tore up the square of carpet
on which it rested, rolled it completely back, and
then, drawing a jemmy from his inside pocket, he
knelt down and worked vigorously upon the ﬂoor.
Presently we heard the sound of sliding boards,
and an instant later a square had opened in the
planks. Killer Evans struck a match, lit a stump of
candle, and vanished from our view.
912
Clearly our moment had come. Holmes touched
my wrist as a signal, and together we stole across to
the open trap-door. Gently as we moved, however,
the old ﬂoor must have creaked under our feet, for
the head of our American, peering anxiously round,
emerged suddenly from the open space. His face
turned upon us with a glare of bafﬂed rage, which
gradually softened into a rather shamefaced grin
as he realized that two pistols were pointed at his
head.
“Well, well!” said he coolly as he scrambled to
the surface. “I guess you have been one too many
for me, Mr. Holmes. Saw through my game, I sup-
pose, and played me for a sucker from the ﬁrst.
Well, sir, I hand it to you; you have me beat and—”
In an instant he had whisked out a revolver
from his breast and had ﬁred two shots. I felt a sud-
den hot sear as if a red-hot iron had been pressed
to my thigh. There was a crash as Holmes’s pistol
came down on the man’s head. I had a vision of
him sprawling upon the ﬂoor with blood running
down his face while Holmes rummaged him for
weapons. Then my friend’s wiry arms were round
me, and he was leading me to a chair.
“You’re not hurt, Watson? For God’s sake, say
that you are not hurt!”
It was worth a wound—it was worth many
wounds—to know the depth of loyalty and love
which lay behind that cold mask. The clear, hard
eyes were dimmed for a moment, and the ﬁrm lips
were shaking. For the one and only time I caught a
glimpse of a great heart as well as of a great brain.
All my years of humble but single-minded service
culminated in that moment of revelation.
“It’s nothing, Holmes. It’s a mere scratch.”
He had ripped up my trousers with his pocket-
knife.
“You are right,” he cried with an immense sigh
of relief. “It is quite superﬁcial.” His face set like
ﬂint as he glared at our prisoner, who was sitting
up with a dazed face. “By the Lord, it is as well for
you. If you had killed Watson, you would not have
got out of this room alive. Now, sir, what have you
to say for yourself?”
He had nothing to say for himself. He only sat
and scowled. I leaned on Holmes’s arm, and to-
gether we looked down into the small cellar which
had been disclosed by the secret ﬂap. It was still
illuminated by the candle which Evans had taken
down with him. Our eyes fell upon a mass of rusted
machinery, great rolls of paper, a litter of bottles,
and, neatly arranged upon a small table, a number
of neat little bundles.“A printing press—a counterfeiter’s outﬁt,” said
Holmes.
“Yes, sir,” said our prisoner, staggering slowly to
his feet and then sinking into the chair. “The great-
est counterfeiter London ever saw. That’s Prescott’s
machine, and those bundles on the table are two
thousand of Prescott’s notes worth a hundred each
and ﬁt to pass anywhere. Help yourselves, gentle-
men. Call it a deal and let me beat it.”
Holmes laughed.
“We don’t do things like that, Mr. Evans. There
is no bolt-hole for you in this country. You shot this
man Prescott, did you not?”
“Yes, sir, and got ﬁve years for it, though it was
he who pulled on me. Five years—when I should
have had a medal the size of a soup plate. No living
man could tell a Prescott from a Bank of England,
and if I hadn’t put him out he would have ﬂooded
London with them. I was the only one in the world
who knew where he made them. Can you wonder
that I wanted to get to the place? And can you
wonder that when I found this crazy boob of a bug-
hunter with the queer name squatting right on the
top of it, and never quitting his room, I had to do
the best I could to shift him? Maybe I would have
been wiser if I had put him away. It would have
been easy enough, but I’m a soft-hearted guy that
can’t begin shooting unless the other man has a
gun also. But say, Mr. Holmes, what have I done
wrong, anyhow? I’ve not used this plant. I’ve not
hurt this old stiff. Where do you get me?”
“Only attempted murder, so far as I can see,”
said Holmes. “But that’s not our job. They take
that at the next stage. What we wanted at present
was just your sweet self. Please give the Yard a call,
Watson. It won’t be entirely unexpected.”
So those were the facts about Killer Evans and
his remarkable invention of the three Garridebs.
We heard later that our poor old friend never got
over the shock of his dissipated dreams. When his
castle in the air fell down, it buried him beneath
the ruins. He was last heard of at a nursing-home
in Brixton. It was a glad day at the Yard when
the Prescott outﬁt was discovered, for, though they
knew that it existed, they had never been able, af-
ter the death of the man, to ﬁnd out where it was.
Evans had indeed done great service and caused
several worthy C. I. D. men to sleep the sounder,
for the counterfeiter stands in a class by himself
as a public danger. They would willingly have
subscribed to that soup-plate medal of which the
criminal had spoken, but an unappreciative bench
took a less favourable view, and the Killer returned
to those shades from which he had just emerged.
913

The Problem of Thor Bridge

Somewhere in the vaults of the bank of
Cox and Co., at Charing Cross, there is a
travel-worn and battered tin dispatch-box
with my name, John H. Watson, M.D.,
Late Indian Army, painted upon the lid. It is
crammed with papers, nearly all of which are
records of cases to illustrate the curious problems
which Mr. Sherlock Holmes had at various times
to examine. Some, and not the least interesting,
were complete failures, and as such will hardly
bear narrating, since no ﬁnal explanation is forth-
coming. A problem without a solution may interest
the student, but can hardly fail to annoy the casual
reader. Among these unﬁnished tales is that of Mr.
James Phillimore, who, stepping back into his own
house to get his umbrella, was never more seen
in this world. No less remarkable is that of the
cutter Alicia , which sailed one spring morning into
a small patch of mist from where she never again
emerged, nor was anything further ever heard of
herself and her crew. A third case worthy of note
is that of Isadora Persano, the well-known journal-
ist and duellist, who was found stark staring mad
with a match box in front of him which contained
a remarkable worm said to be unknown to science.
Apart from these unfathomed cases, there are some
which involve the secrets of private families to an
extent which would mean consternation in many
exalted quarters if it were thought possible that
they might ﬁnd their way into print. I need not say
that such a breach of conﬁdence is unthinkable, and
that these records will be separated and destroyed
now that my friend has time to turn his energies to
the matter. There remain a considerable residue of
cases of greater or less interest which I might have
edited before had I not feared to give the public a
surfeit which might react upon the reputation of
the man whom above all others I revere. In some
I was myself concerned and can speak as an eye-
witness, while in others I was either not present
or played so small a part that they could only be
told as by a third person. The following narrative
is drawn from my own experience.
It was a wild morning in October, and I ob-
served as I was dressing how the last remaining
leaves were being whirled from the solitary plane
tree which graces the yard behind our house. I
descended to breakfast prepared to ﬁnd my com-
panion in depressed spirits, for, like all great artists,
he was easily impressed by his surroundings. On
the contrary, I found that he had nearly ﬁnished his
meal, and that his mood was particularly bright and
joyous, with that somewhat sinister cheerfulness
which was characteristic of his lighter moments.
“You have a case, Holmes?” I remarked.“The faculty of deduction is certainly conta-
gious, Watson,” he answered. “It has enabled you
to probe my secret. Yes, I have a case. After a month
of trivialities and stagnation the wheels move once
more.”
“Might I share it?”
“There is little to share, but we may discuss it
when you have consumed the two hard-boiled eggs
with which our new cook has favoured us. Their
condition may not be unconnected with the copy of
theFamily Herald which I observed yesterday upon
the hall-table. Even so trivial a matter as cooking
an egg demands an attention which is conscious of
the passage of time and incompatible with the love
romance in that excellent periodical.”
A quarter of an hour later the table had been
cleared and we were face to face. He had drawn a
letter from his pocket.
“You have heard of Neil Gibson, the Gold King?”
he said.
“You mean the American Senator?”
“Well, he was once Senator for some Western
state, but is better known as the greatest gold-
mining magnate in the world.”
“Yes, I know of him. He has surely lived in
England for some time. His name is very familiar.”
“Yes, he bought a considerable estate in Hamp-
shire some ﬁve years ago. Possibly you have al-
ready heard of the tragic end of his wife?”
“Of course. I remember it now. That is why the
name is familiar. But I really know nothing of the
details.”
Holmes waved his hand towards some papers
on a chair. “I had no idea that the case was coming
my way or I should have had my extracts ready,”
said he. “The fact is that the problem, though ex-
ceedingly sensational, appeared to present no dif-
ﬁculty. The interesting personality of the accused
does not obscure the clearness of the evidence. That
was the view taken by the coroner’s jury and also
in the police-court proceedings. It is now referred
to the Assizes at Winchester. I fear it is a thankless
business. I can discover facts, Watson, but I cannot
change them. Unless some entirely new and un-
expected ones come to light I do not see what my
client can hope for.”
“Your client?”
“Ah, I forgot I had not told you. I am getting
into your involved habit, Watson, of telling a story
backward. You had best read this ﬁrst.”
The letter which he handed to me, written in a
bold, masterful hand, ran as follows:
917
TheProblem of Thor Bridge
Claridge’s Hotel
October 3rd.
Dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes :
I can’t see the best woman God ever
made go to her death without doing all
that is possible to save her. I can’t ex-
plain things—I can’t even try to explain
them, but I know beyond all doubt that
Miss Dunbar is innocent. You know the
facts—who doesn’t? It has been the gos-
sip of the country. And never a voice
raised for her! It’s the damned injus-
tice of it all that makes me crazy. That
woman has a heart that wouldn’t let her
kill a ﬂy. Well, I’ll come at eleven to-
morrow and see if you can get some ray
of light in the dark. Maybe I have a clue
and don’t know it. Anyhow, all I know
and all I have and all I am are for your
use if only you can save her. If ever in
your life you showed your powers, put
them now into this case.
— Yours faithfully,
J. NeilGibson .
“There you have it,” said Sherlock Holmes,
knocking out the ashes of his after-breakfast pipe
and slowly reﬁlling it. “That is the gentleman I
await. As to the story, you have hardly time to
master all these papers, so I must give it to you in a
nutshell if you are to take an intelligent interest in
the proceedings. This man is the greatest ﬁnancial
power in the world, and a man, as I understand, of
most violent and formidable character. He married
a wife, the victim of this tragedy, of whom I know
nothing save that she was past her prime, which
was the more unfortunate as a very attractive gov-
erness superintended the education of two young
children. These are the three people concerned, and
the scene is a grand old manor house, the centre
of a historical English state. Then as to the tragedy.
The wife was found in the grounds nearly half a
mile from the house, late at night, clad in her din-
ner dress, with a shawl over her shoulders and a
revolver bullet through her brain. No weapon was
found near her and there was no local clue as to the
murder. No weapon near her, Watson—mark that!
The crime seems to have been committed late in the
evening, and the body was found by a game-keeper
about eleven o’clock, when it was examined by the
police and by a doctor before being carried up to
the house. Is this too condensed, or can you follow
it clearly?”
“It is all very clear. But why suspect the gov-
erness?”“Well, in the ﬁrst place there is some very direct
evidence. A revolver with one discharged cham-
ber and a calibre which corresponded with the
bullet was found on the ﬂoor of her wardrobe.”
His eyes ﬁxed and he repeated in broken words,
“On—the—ﬂoor—of—her—wardrobe.” Then he
sank into silence, and I saw that some train of
thought had been set moving which I should be
foolish to interrupt. Suddenly with a start he
emerged into brisk life once more. “Yes, Watson, it
was found. Pretty damning, eh? So the two juries
thought. Then the dead woman had a note upon
her making an appointment at that very place and
signed by the governess. How’s that? Finally there
is the motive. Senator Gibson is an attractive per-
son. If his wife dies, who more likely to succeed
her than the young lady who had already by all
accounts received pressing attentions from her em-
ployer? Love, fortune, power, all depending upon
one middle-aged life. Ugly, Watson—very ugly!”
“Yes, indeed, Holmes.”
“Nor could she prove an alibi. On the contrary,
she had to admit that she was down near Thor
Bridge—that was the scene of the tragedy—about
that hour. She couldn’t deny it, for some passing
villager had seen her there.”
“That really seems ﬁnal.”
“And yet, Watson—and yet! This bridge—a
single broad span of stone with balustraded
sides—carries the drive over the narrowest part
of a long, deep, reed-girt sheet of water. Thor Mere
it is called. In the mouth of the bridge lay the dead
woman. Such are the main facts. But here, if I
mistake not, is our client, considerably before his
time.”
Billy had opened the door, but the name which
he announced was an unexpected one. Mr. Mar-
low Bates was a stranger to both of us. He was a
thin, nervous wisp of a man with frightened eyes
and a twitching, hesitating manner—a man whom
my own professional eye would judge to be on the
brink of an absolute nervous breakdown.
“You seem agitated, Mr. Bates,” said Holmes.
“Pray sit down. I fear I can only give you a short
time, for I have an appointment at eleven.”
“I know you have,” our visitor gasped, shooting
out short sentences like a man who is out of breath.
“Mr. Gibson is coming. Mr. Gibson is my employer.
I am manager of his estate. Mr. Holmes, he is a
villain—an infernal villain.”
“Strong language, Mr. Bates.”
“I have to be emphatic, Mr. Holmes, for the time
is so limited. I would not have him ﬁnd me here
for the world. He is almost due now. But I was so
918
situated that I could not come earlier. His secretary,
Mr. Ferguson, only told me this morning of his
appointment with you.”
“And you are his manager?”
“I have given him notice. In a couple of weeks I
shall have shaken off his accursed slavery. A hard
man, Mr. Holmes, hard to all about him. Those
public charities are a screen to cover his private in-
iquities. But his wife was his chief victim. He was
brutal to her—yes, sir, brutal! How she came by
her death I do not know, but I am sure that he had
made her life a misery to her. She was a creature
of the tropics, a Brazilian by birth, as no doubt you
know.”
“No, it had escaped me.”
“Tropical by birth and tropical by nature. A
child of the sun and of passion. She had loved him
as such women can love, but when her own phys-
ical charms had faded—I am told that they once
were great—there was nothing to hold him. We all
liked her and felt for her and hated him for the way
that he treated her. But he is plausible and cunning.
That is all I have to say to you. Don’t take him at
his face value. There is more behind. Now I’ll go.
No, no, don’t detain me! He is almost due.”
With a frightened look at the clock our strange
visitor literally ran to the door and disappeared.
“Well! Well!” said Holmes after an interval of
silence. “Mr. Gibson seems to have a nice loyal
household. But the warning is a useful one, and
now we can only wait till the man himself appears.”
Sharp at the hour we heard a heavy step upon
the stairs, and the famous millionaire was shown
into the room. As I looked upon him I understood
not only the fears and dislike of his manager but
also the execrations which so many business rivals
have heaped upon his head. If I were a sculptor
and desired to idealize the successful man of affairs,
iron of nerve and leathery of conscience, I should
choose Mr. Neil Gibson as my model. His tall,
gaunt, craggy ﬁgure had a suggestion of hunger
and rapacity. An Abraham Lincoln keyed to base
uses instead of high ones would give some idea
of the man. His face might have been chiselled in
granite, hard-set, craggy, remorseless, with deep
lines upon it, the scars of many a crisis. Cold gray
eyes, looking shrewdly out from under bristling
brows, surveyed us each in turn. He bowed in per-
functory fashion as Holmes mentioned my name,
and then with a masterful air of possession he drew
a chair up to my companion and seated himself
with his bony knees almost touching him.“Let me say right here, Mr. Holmes,” he began,
“that money is nothing to me in this case. You can
burn it if it’s any use in lighting you to the truth.
This woman is innocent and this woman has to be
cleared, and it’s up to you to do it. Name your
ﬁgure!”
“My professional charges are upon a ﬁxed
scale,” said Holmes coldly. “I do not vary them,
save when I remit them altogether.”
“Well, if dollars make no difference to you, think
of the reputation. If you pull this off every paper in
England and America will be booming you. You’ll
be the talk of two continents.”
“Thank you, Mr. Gibson, I do not think that I
am in need of booming. It may surprise you to
know that I prefer to work anonymously, and that
it is the problem itself which attracts me. But we
are wasting time. Let us get down to the facts.”
“I think that you will ﬁnd all the main ones in
the press reports. I don’t know that I can add any-
thing which will help you. But if there is anything
you would wish more light upon—well, I am here
to give it.”
“Well, there is just one point.”
“What is it?”
“What were the exact relations between you and
Miss Dunbar?”
The Gold King gave a violent start and half rose
from his chair. Then his massive calm came back
to him.
“I suppose you are within your rights—and
maybe doing your duty—in asking such a question,
Mr. Holmes.”
“We will agree to suppose so,” said Holmes.
“Then I can assure you that our relations were
entirely and always those of an employer towards
a young lady whom he never conversed with, or
ever saw, save when she was in the company of his
children.”
Holmes rose from his chair.
“I am a rather busy man, Mr. Gibson,” said he,
“and I have no time or taste for aimless conversa-
tions. I wish you good-morning.”
Our visitor had risen also, and his great loose
ﬁgure towered above Holmes. There was an angry
gleam from under those bristling brows and a tinge
of colour in the sallow cheeks.
“What the devil do you mean by this, Mr.
Holmes? Do you dismiss my case?”
“Well, Mr. Gibson, at least I dismiss you. I
should have thought my words were plain.”
919
TheProblem of Thor Bridge
“Plain enough, but what’s at the back of it? Rais-
ing the price on me, or afraid to tackle it, or what?
I’ve a right to a plain answer.”
“Well, perhaps you have,” said Holmes. “I’ll
give you one. This case is quite sufﬁciently compli-
cated to start with without the further difﬁculty of
false information.”
“Meaning that I lie.”
“Well, I was trying to express it as delicately as
I could, but if you insist upon the word I will not
contradict you.”
I sprang to my feet, for the expression upon the
millionaire’s face was ﬁendish in its intensity, and
he had raised his great knotted ﬁst. Holmes smiled
languidly and reached his hand out for his pipe.
“Don’t be noisy, Mr. Gibson. I ﬁnd that after
breakfast even the smallest argument is unsettling.
I suggest that a stroll in the morning air and a little
quiet thought will be greatly to your advantage.”
With an effort the Gold King mastered his fury.
I could not but admire him, for by a supreme self-
command he had turned in a minute from a hot
ﬂame of anger to a frigid and contemptuous indif-
ference.
“Well, it’s your choice. I guess you know how
to run your own business. I can’t make you touch
the case against your will. You’ve done yourself no
good this morning, Mr. Holmes, for I have broken
stronger men than you. No man ever crossed me
and was the better for it.”
“So many have said so, and yet here I am,” said
Holmes, smiling. “Well, good-morning, Mr. Gibson.
You have a good deal yet to learn.”
Our visitor made a noisy exit, but Holmes
smoked in imperturbable silence with dreamy eyes
ﬁxed upon the ceiling.
“Any views, Watson?” he asked at last.
“Well, Holmes, I must confess that when I con-
sider that this is a man who would certainly brush
any obstacle from his path, and when I remember
that his wife may have been an obstacle and an
object of dislike, as that man Bates plainly told us,
it seems to me—”
“Exactly. And to me also.”
“But what were his relations with the governess,
and how did you discover them?”
“Bluff, Watson, bluff! When I considered the
passionate, unconventional, unbusinesslike tone of
his letter and contrasted it with his self-contained
manner and appearance, it was pretty clear that
there was some deep emotion which centred upon
the accused woman rather than upon the victim.We’ve got to understand the exact relations of those
three people if we are to reach the truth. You saw
the frontal attack which I made upon him, and
how imperturbably he received it. Then I bluffed
him by giving him the impression that I was abso-
lutely certain, when in reality I was only extremely
suspicious.”
“Perhaps he will come back?”
“He is sure to come back. He must come back.
He can’t leave it where it is. Ha! isn’t that a ring?
Yes, there is his footstep. Well, Mr. Gibson, I was
just saying to Dr. Watson that you were somewhat
overdue.”
The Gold King had reentered the room in a
more chastened mood than he had left it. His
wounded pride still showed in his resentful eyes,
but his common sense had shown him that he must
yield if he would attain his end.
“I’ve been thinking it over, Mr. Holmes, and I
feel that I have been hasty in taking your remarks
amiss. You are justiﬁed in getting down to the facts,
whatever they may be, and I think the more of you
for it. I can assure you, however, that the relations
between Miss Dunbar and me don’t really touch
this case.”
“That is for me to decide, is it not?”
“Yes, I guess that is so. You’re like a surgeon
who wants every symptom before he can give his
diagnosis.”
“Exactly. That expresses it. And it is only a
patient who has an object in deceiving his surgeon
who would conceal the facts of his case.”
“That may be so, but you will admit, Mr.
Holmes, that most men would shy off a bit when
they are asked point-blank what their relations with
a woman may be—if there is really some serious
feeling in the case. I guess most men have a little
private reserve of their own in some corner of their
souls where they don’t welcome intruders. And
you burst suddenly into it. But the object excuses
you, since it was to try and save her. Well, the
stakes are down and the reserve open, and you can
explore where you will. What is it you want?”
“The truth.”
The Gold King paused for a moment as one
who marshals his thoughts. His grim, deep-lined
face had become even sadder and more grave.
“I can give it to you in a very few words, Mr.
Holmes,” said he at last. “There are some things
that are painful as well as difﬁcult to say, so I won’t
go deeper than is needful. I met my wife when I
was gold-hunting in Brazil. Maria Pinto was the
daughter of a government ofﬁcial at Manaos, and
she was very beautiful. I was young and ardent
920
in those days, but even now, as I look back with
colder blood and a more critical eye, I can see that
she was rare and wonderful in her beauty. It was
a deep rich nature, too, passionate, whole-hearted,
tropical, ill-balanced, very different from the Amer-
ican women whom I had known. Well, to make
a long story short, I loved her and I married her.
It was only when the romance had passed—and
it lingered for years—that I realized that we had
nothing—absolutely nothing—in common. My love
faded. If hers had faded also it might have been
easier. But you know the wonderful way of women!
Do what I might, nothing could turn her from me.
If I have been harsh to her, even brutal as some
have said, it has been because I knew that if I could
kill her love, or if it turned to hate, it would be
easier for both of us. But nothing changed her.
She adored me in those English woods as she had
adored me twenty years ago on the banks of the
Amazon. Do what I might, she was as devoted as
ever.
“Then came Miss Grace Dunbar. She answered
our advertisement and became governess to our
two children. Perhaps you have seen her portrait in
the papers. The whole world has proclaimed that
she also is a very beautiful woman. Now, I make
no pretence to be more moral than my neighbours,
and I will admit to you that I could not live under
the same roof with such a woman and in daily con-
tact with her without feeling a passionate regard
for her. Do you blame me, Mr. Holmes?”
“I do not blame you for feeling it. I should
blame you if you expressed it, since this young
lady was in a sense under your protection.”
“Well, maybe so,” said the millionaire, though
for a moment the reproof had brought the old an-
gry gleam into his eyes. “I’m not pretending to be
any better than I am. I guess all my life I’ve been a
man that reached out his hand for what he wanted,
and I never wanted anything more than the love
and possession of that woman. I told her so.”
“Oh, you did, did you?”
Holmes could look very formidable when he
was moved.
“I said to her that if I could marry her I would,
but that it was out of my power. I said that money
was no object and that all I could do to make her
happy and comfortable would be done.”
“Very generous, I am sure,” said Holmes with a
sneer.
“See here, Mr. Holmes. I came to you on a ques-
tion of evidence, not on a question of morals. I’m
not asking for your criticism.”“It is only for the young lady’s sake that I touch
your case at all,” said Holmes sternly. “I don’t know
that anything she is accused of is really worse than
what you have yourself admitted, that you have
tried to ruin a defenceless girl who was under your
roof. Some of you rich men have to be taught that
all the world cannot be bribed into condoning your
offences.”
To my surprise the Gold King took the reproof
with equanimity.
“That’s how I feel myself about it now. I thank
God that my plans did not work out as I intended.
She would have none of it, and she wanted to leave
the house instantly.”
“Why did she not?”
“Well, in the ﬁrst place, others were dependent
upon her, and it was no light matter for her to let
them all down by sacriﬁcing her living. When I
had sworn—as I did—that she should never be mo-
lested again, she consented to remain. But there
was another reason. She knew the inﬂuence she
had over me, and that it was stronger than any
other inﬂuence in the world. She wanted to use it
for good.”
“How?”
“Well, she knew something of my affairs. They
are large, Mr. Holmes—large beyond the belief of
an ordinary man. I can make or break—and it is
usually break. It wasn’t individuals only. It was
communities, cities, even nations. Business is a
hard game, and the weak go to the wall. I played
the game for all it was worth. I never squealed my-
self, and I never cared if the other fellow squealed.
But she saw it different. I guess she was right. She
believed and said that a fortune for one man that
was more than he needed should not be built on
ten thousand ruined men who were left without
the means of life. That was how she saw it, and I
guess she could see past the dollars to something
that was more lasting. She found that I listened
to what she said, and she believed she was serv-
ing the world by inﬂuencing my actions. So she
stayed—and then this came along.”
“Can you throw any light upon that?”
The Gold King paused for a minute or more,
his head sunk in his hands, lost in deep thought.
“It’s very black against her. I can’t deny that.
And women lead an inward life and may do things
beyond the judgment of a man. At ﬁrst I was so
rattled and taken aback that I was ready to think
she had been led away in some extraordinary fash-
ion that was clean against her usual nature. One
explanation came into my head. I give it to you,
Mr. Holmes, for what it is worth. There is no doubt
921
TheProblem of Thor Bridge
that my wife was bitterly jealous. There is a soul-
jealousy that can be as frantic as any body-jealousy,
and though my wife had no cause—and I think
she understood this—for the latter, she was aware
that this English girl exerted an inﬂuence upon my
mind and my acts that she herself never had. It
was an inﬂuence for good, but that did not mend
the matter. She was crazy with hatred, and the heat
of the Amazon was always in her blood. She might
have planned to murder Miss Dunbar—or we will
say to threaten her with a gun and so frighten her
into leaving us. Then there might have been a scuf-
ﬂe and the gun gone off and shot the woman who
held it.”
“That possibility had already occurred to me,”
said Holmes. “Indeed, it is the only obvious alter-
native to deliberate murder.”
“But she utterly denies it.”
“Well, that is not ﬁnal—is it? One can under-
stand that a woman placed in so awful a position
might hurry home still in her bewilderment hold-
ing the revolver. She might even throw it down
among her clothes, hardly knowing what she was
doing, and when it was found she might try to lie
her way out by a total denial, since all explanation
was impossible. What is against such a supposi-
tion?”
“Miss Dunbar herself.”
“Well, perhaps.”
Holmes looked at his watch. “I have no doubt
we can get the necessary permits this morning and
reach Winchester by the evening train. When I have
seen this young lady it is very possible that I may
be of more use to you in the matter, though I can-
not promise that my conclusions will necessarily
be such as you desire.”
There was some delay in the ofﬁcial pass, and
instead of reaching Winchester that day we went
down to Thor Place, the Hampshire estate of Mr.
Neil Gibson. He did not accompany us himself,
but we had the address of Sergeant Coventry, of
the local police, who had ﬁrst examined into the
affair. He was a tall, thin, cadaverous man, with a
secretive and mysterious manner which conveyed
the idea that he knew or suspected a very great
deal more than he dared say. He had a trick, too,
of suddenly sinking his voice to a whisper as if
he had come upon something of vital importance,
though the information was usually commonplace
enough. Behind these tricks of manner he soon
showed himself to be a decent, honest fellow who
was not too proud to admit that he was out of his
depth and would welcome any help.“Anyhow, I’d rather have you than Scotland
Yard, Mr. Holmes,” said he. “If the Yard gets called
into a case, then the local loses all credit for suc-
cess and may be blamed for failure. Now, you play
straight, so I’ve heard.”
“I need not appear in the matter at all,” said
Holmes to the evident relief of our melancholy ac-
quaintance. “If I can clear it up I don’t ask to have
my name mentioned.”
“Well, it’s very handsome of you, I am sure.
And your friend, Dr. Watson, can be trusted, I know.
Now, Mr. Holmes, as we walk down to the place
there is one question I should like to ask you. I’d
breathe it to no soul but you.” He looked round as
though he hardly dare utter the words. “Don’t you
think there might be a case against Mr. Neil Gibson
himself?”
“I have been considering that.”
“You’ve not seen Miss Dunbar. She is a wonder-
ful ﬁne woman in every way. He may well have
wished his wife out of the road. And these Amer-
icans are readier with pistols than our folk are. It
was hispistol, you know.”
“Was that clearly made out?”
“Yes, sir. It was one of a pair that he had.”
“One of a pair? Where is the other?”
“Well, the gentleman has a lot of ﬁrearms of
one sort and another. We never quite matched that
particular pistol—but the box was made for two.”
“If it was one of a pair you should surely be
able to match it.”
“Well, we have them all laid out at the house if
you would care to look them over.”
“Later, perhaps. I think we will walk down to-
gether and have a look at the scene of the tragedy.”
This conversation had taken place in the little
front room of Sergeant Coventry’s humble cottage
which served as the local police-station. A walk
of half a mile or so across a wind-swept heath, all
gold and bronze with the fading ferns, brought us
to a side-gate opening into the grounds of the Thor
Place estate. A path led us through the pheasant
preserves, and then from a clearing we saw the
widespread, half-timbered house, half Tudor and
half Georgian, upon the crest of the hill. Beside
us there was a long, reedy pool, constricted in the
centre where the main carriage drive passed over a
stone bridge, but swelling into small lakes on either
side. Our guide paused at the mouth of this bridge,
and he pointed to the ground.
“That was where Mrs. Gibson’s body lay. I
marked it by that stone.”
922
“I understand that you were there before it was
moved?”
“Yes, they sent for me at once.”
“Who did?”
“Mr. Gibson himself. The moment the alarm
was given and he had rushed down with others
from the house, he insisted that nothing should be
moved until the police should arrive.”
“That was sensible. I gathered from the news-
paper report that the shot was ﬁred from close
quarters.”
“Yes, sir, very close.”
“Near the right temple?”
“Just behind it, sir.”
“How did the body lie?”
“On the back, sir. No trace of a struggle. No
marks. No weapon. The short note from Miss
Dunbar was clutched in her left hand.”
“Clutched, you say?”
“Yes, sir, we could hardly open the ﬁngers.”
“That is of great importance. It excludes the
idea that anyone could have placed the note there
after death in order to furnish a false clue. Dear
me! The note, as I remember, was quite short:
“I will be at Thor Bridge at nine o’clock.
— “G. D unbar .
“Was that not so?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Did Miss Dunbar admit writing it?”
“Yes, sir.”
“What was her explanation?”
“Her defence was reserved for the Assizes. She
would say nothing.”
“The problem is certainly a very interesting one.
The point of the letter is very obscure, is it not?”
“Well, sir,” said the guide, “it seemed, if I may
be so bold as to say so, the only really clear point
in the whole case.”
Holmes shook his head.
“Granting that the letter is genuine and was
really written, it was certainly received some time
before—say one hour or two. Why, then, was this
lady still clasping it in her left hand? Why should
she carry it so carefully? She did not need to refer
to it in the interview. Does it not seem remarkable?”
“Well, sir, as you put it, perhaps it does.”“I think I should like to sit quietly for a few
minutes and think it out.” He seated himself upon
the stone ledge of the bridge, and I could see his
quick gray eyes darting their questioning glances
in every direction. Suddenly he sprang up again
and ran across to the opposite parapet, whipped
his lens from his pocket, and began to examine the
stonework.
“This is curious,” said he.
“Yes, sir, we saw the chip on the ledge. I expect
it’s been done by some passer-by.”
The stonework was gray, but at this one point
it showed white for a space not larger than a six-
pence. When examined closely one could see that
the surface was chipped as by a sharp blow.
“It took some violence to do that,” said Holmes
thoughtfully. With his cane he struck the ledge
several times without leaving a mark. “Yes, it was
a hard knock. In a curious place, too. It was not
from above but from below, for you see that it is on
thelower edge of the parapet.”
“But it is at least ﬁfteen feet from the body.”
“Yes, it is ﬁfteen feet from the body. It may
have nothing to do with the matter, but it is a point
worth noting. I do not think that we have anything
more to learn here. There were no footsteps, you
say?”
“The ground was iron hard, sir. There were no
traces at all.”
“Then we can go. We will go up to the house
ﬁrst and look over these weapons of which you
speak. Then we shall get on to Winchester, for I
should desire to see Miss Dunbar before we go
farther.”
Mr. Neil Gibson had not returned from town,
but we saw in the house the neurotic Mr. Bates who
had called upon us in the morning. He showed
us with a sinister relish the formidable array of
ﬁrearms of various shapes and sizes which his em-
ployer had accumulated in the course of an adven-
turous life.
“Mr. Gibson has his enemies, as anyone would
expect who knew him and his methods,” said he.
“He sleeps with a loaded revolver in the drawer
beside his bed. He is a man of violence, sir, and
there are times when all of us are afraid of him. I
am sure that the poor lady who has passed was
often terriﬁed.”
“Did you ever witness physical violence to-
wards her?”
“No, I cannot say that. But I have heard words
which were nearly as bad—words of cold, cutting
contempt, even before the servants.”
923
TheProblem of Thor Bridge
“Our millionaire does not seem to shine in pri-
vate life,” remarked Holmes as we made our way to
the station. “Well, Watson, we have come on a good
many facts, some of them new ones, and yet I seem
some way from my conclusion. In spite of the very
evident dislike which Mr. Bates has to his employer,
I gather from him that when the alarm came he
was undoubtedly in his library. Dinner was over
at8.30and all was normal up to then. It is true
that the alarm was somewhat late in the evening,
but the tragedy certainly occurred about the hour
named in the note. There is no evidence at all that
Mr. Gibson had been out of doors since his return
from town at ﬁve o’clock. On the other hand, Miss
Dunbar, as I understand it, admits that she had
made an appointment to meet Mrs. Gibson at the
bridge. Beyond this she would say nothing, as her
lawyer had advised her to reserve her defence. We
have several very vital questions to ask that young
lady, and my mind will not be easy until we have
seen her. I must confess that the case would seem
to me to be very black against her if it were not for
one thing.”
“And what is that, Holmes?”
“The ﬁnding of the pistol in her wardrobe.”
“Dear me, Holmes!” I cried, “that seemed to me
to be the most damning incident of all.”
“Not so, Watson. It had struck me even at my
ﬁrst perfunctory reading as very strange, and now
that I am in closer touch with the case it is my only
ﬁrm ground for hope. We must look for consis-
tency. Where there is a want of it we must suspect
deception.”
“I hardly follow you.”
“Well now, Watson, suppose for a moment that
we visualize you in the character of a woman who,
in a cold, premeditated fashion, is about to get
rid of a rival. You have planned it. A note has
been written. The victim has come. You have your
weapon. The crime is done. It has been work-
manlike and complete. Do you tell me that after
carrying out so crafty a crime you would now ruin
your reputation as a criminal by forgetting to ﬂing
your weapon into those adjacent reed-beds which
would forever cover it, but you must needs carry it
carefully home and put it in your own wardrobe,
the very ﬁrst place that would be searched? Your
best friends would hardly call you a schemer, Wat-
son, and yet I could not picture you doing anything
so crude as that.”
“In the excitement of the moment—”
“No, no, Watson, I will not admit that it is pos-
sible. Where a crime is coolly premeditated, thenthe means of covering it are coolly premeditated
also. I hope, therefore, that we are in the presence
of a serious misconception.”
“But there is so much to explain.”
“Well, we shall set about explaining it. When
once your point of view is changed, the very thing
which was so damning becomes a clue to the truth.
For example, there is this revolver. Miss Dunbar
disclaims all knowledge of it. On our new theory
she is speaking truth when she says so. Therefore,
it was placed in her wardrobe. Who placed it there?
Someone who wished to incriminate her. Was not
that person the actual criminal? You see how we
come at once upon a most fruitful line of inquiry.”
We were compelled to spend the night at Winch-
ester, as the formalities had not yet been completed,
but next morning, in the company of Mr. Joyce
Cummings, the rising barrister who was entrusted
with the defence, we were allowed to see the young
lady in her cell. I had expected from all that we had
heard to see a beautiful woman, but I can never for-
get the effect which Miss Dunbar produced upon
me. It was no wonder that even the masterful mil-
lionaire had found in her something more powerful
than himself—something which could control and
guide him. One felt, too, as one looked at the
strong, clear-cut, and yet sensitive face, that even
should she be capable of some impetuous deed,
none the less there was an innate nobility of charac-
ter which would make her inﬂuence always for the
good. She was a brunette, tall, with a noble ﬁgure
and commanding presence, but her dark eyes had
in them the appealing, helpless expression of the
hunted creature who feels the nets around it, but
can see no way out from the toils. Now, as she
realized the presence and the help of my famous
friend, there came a touch of colour in her wan
cheeks and a light of hope began to glimmer in the
glance which she turned upon us.
“Perhaps Mr. Neil Gibson has told you some-
thing of what occurred between us?” she asked in
a low, agitated voice.
“Yes,” Holmes answered, “you need not pain
yourself by entering into that part of the story. After
seeing you, I am prepared to accept Mr. Gibson’s
statement both as to the inﬂuence which you had
over him and as to the innocence of your relations
with him. But why was the whole situation not
brought out in court?”
“It seemed to me incredible that such a charge
could be sustained. I thought that if we waited the
whole thing must clear itself up without our being
compelled to enter into painful details of the inner
924
life of the family. But I understand that far from
clearing it has become even more serious.”
“My dear young lady,” cried Holmes earnestly,
“I beg you to have no illusions upon the point. Mr.
Cummings here would assure you that all the cards
are at present against us, and that we must do ev-
erything that is possible if we are to win clear. It
would be a cruel deception to pretend that you are
not in very great danger. Give me all the help you
can, then, to get at the truth.”
“I will conceal nothing.”
“Tell us, then, of your true relations with Mr.
Gibson’s wife.”
“She hated me, Mr. Holmes. She hated me with
all the fervour of her tropical nature. She was a
woman who would do nothing by halves, and the
measure of her love for her husband was the mea-
sure also of her hatred for me. It is probable that
she misunderstood our relations. I would not wish
to wrong her, but she loved so vividly in a physical
sense that she could hardly understand the men-
tal, and even spiritual, tie which held her husband
to me, or imagine that it was only my desire to
inﬂuence his power to good ends which kept me
under his roof. I can see now that I was wrong.
Nothing could justify me in remaining where I was
a cause of unhappiness, and yet it is certain that the
unhappiness would have remained even if I had
left the house.”
“Now, Miss Dunbar,” said Holmes, “I beg you
to tell us exactly what occurred that evening.”
“I can tell you the truth so far as I know it, Mr.
Holmes, but I am in a position to prove nothing,
and there are points—the most vital points—which
I can neither explain nor can I imagine any expla-
nation.”
“If you will ﬁnd the facts, perhaps others may
ﬁnd the explanation.”
“With regard, then, to my presence at Thor
Bridge that night, I received a note from Mrs. Gib-
son in the morning. It lay on the table of the school-
room, and it may have been left there by her own
hand. It implored me to see her there after dinner,
said she had something important to say to me,
and asked me to leave an answer on the sundial
in the garden, as she desired no one to be in our
conﬁdence. I saw no reason for such secrecy, but I
did as she asked, accepting the appointment. She
asked me to destroy her note and I burned it in
the schoolroom grate. She was very much afraid
of her husband, who treated her with a harshness
for which I frequently reproached him, and I couldonly imagine that she acted in this way because she
did not wish him to know of our interview.”
“Yet she kept your reply very carefully?”
“Yes. I was surprised to hear that she had it in
her hand when she died.”
“Well, what happened then?”
“I went down as I had promised. When I
reached the bridge she was waiting for me. Never
did I realize till that moment how this poor creature
hated me. She was like a mad woman—indeed, I
think she wasa mad woman, subtly mad with the
deep power of deception which insane people may
have. How else could she have met me with un-
concern every day and yet had so raging a hatred
of me in her heart? I will not say what she said.
She poured her whole wild fury out in burning
and horrible words. I did not even answer—I could
not. It was dreadful to see her. I put my hands to
my ears and rushed away. When I left her she was
standing, still shrieking out her curses at me, in the
mouth of the bridge.”
“Where she was afterwards found?”
“Within a few yards from the spot.”
“And yet, presuming that she met her death
shortly after you left her, you heard no shot?”
“No, I heard nothing. But, indeed, Mr. Holmes,
I was so agitated and horriﬁed by this terrible out-
break that I rushed to get back to the peace of my
own room, and I was incapable of noticing any-
thing which happened.”
“You say that you returned to your room. Did
you leave it again before next morning?”
“Yes, when the alarm came that the poor crea-
ture had met her death I ran out with the others.”
“Did you see Mr. Gibson?”
“Yes, he had just returned from the bridge when
I saw him. He had sent for the doctor and the po-
lice.”
“Did he seem to you much perturbed?”
“Mr. Gibson is a very strong, self-contained man.
I do not think that he would ever show his emo-
tions on the surface. But I, who knew him so well,
could see that he was deeply concerned.”
“Then we come to the all-important point. This
pistol that was found in your room. Had you ever
seen it before?”
“Never, I swear it.”
“When was it found?”
“Next morning, when the police made their
search.”
“Among your clothes?”
“Yes, on the ﬂoor of my wardrobe under my
dresses.”
925
TheProblem of Thor Bridge
“You could not guess how long it had been
there?”
“It had not been there the morning before.”
“How do you know?”
“Because I tidied out the wardrobe.”
“That is ﬁnal. Then someone came into your
room and placed the pistol there in order to incul-
pate you.”
“It must have been so.”
“And when?”
“It could only have been at meal-time, or else at
the hours when I would be in the schoolroom with
the children.”
“As you were when you got the note?”
“Yes, from that time onward for the whole morn-
ing.”
“Thank you, Miss Dunbar. Is there any other
point which could help me in the investigation?”
“I can think of none.”
“There was some sign of violence on the
stonework of the bridge—a perfectly fresh chip just
opposite the body. Could you suggest any possible
explanation of that?”
“Surely it must be a mere coincidence.”
“Curious, Miss Dunbar, very curious. Why
should it appear at the very time of the tragedy,
and why at the very place?”
“But what could have caused it? Only great
violence could have such an effect.”
Holmes did not answer. His pale, eager face had
suddenly assumed that tense, far-away expression
which I had learned to associate with the supreme
manifestations of his genius. So evident was the
crisis in his mind that none of us dared to speak,
and we sat, barrister, prisoner, and myself, watch-
ing him in a concentrated and absorbed silence.
Suddenly he sprang from his chair, vibrating with
nervous energy and the pressing need for action.
“Come, Watson, come!” he cried.
“What is it, Mr. Holmes?”
“Never mind, my dear lady. You will hear from
me, Mr. Cummings. With the help of the god of
justice I will give you a case which will make Eng-
land ring. You will get news by to-morrow, Miss
Dunbar, and meanwhile take my assurance that the
clouds are lifting and that I have every hope that
the light of truth is breaking through.”
It was not a long journey from Winchester to
Thor Place, but it was long to me in my impatience,
while for Holmes it was evident that it seemedendless; for, in his nervous restlessness, he could
not sit still, but paced the carriage or drummed
with his long, sensitive ﬁngers upon the cushions
beside him. Suddenly, however, as we neared our
destination he seated himself opposite to me—we
had a ﬁrst-class carriage to ourselves—and laying
a hand upon each of my knees he looked into my
eyes with the peculiarly mischievous gaze which
was characteristic of his more imp-like moods.
“Watson,” said he, “I have some recollection
that you go armed upon these excursions of ours.”
It was as well for him that I did so, for he took
little care for his own safety when his mind was
once absorbed by a problem, so that more than
once my revolver had been a good friend in need.
I reminded him of the fact.
“Yes, yes, I am a little absent-minded in such
matters. But have you your revolver on you?”
I produced it from my hip-pocket, a short,
handy, but very serviceable little weapon. He undid
the catch, shook out the cartridges, and examined
it with care.
“It’s heavy—remarkably heavy,” said he.
“Yes, it is a solid bit of work.”
He mused over it for a minute.
“Do you know, Watson,” said he, “I believe your
revolver is going to have a very intimate connection
with the mystery which we are investigating.”
“My dear Holmes, you are joking.”
“No, Watson, I am very serious. There is a test
before us. If the test comes off, all will be clear.
And the test will depend upon the conduct of this
little weapon. One cartridge out. Now we will
replace the other ﬁve and put on the safety-catch.
So! That increases the weight and makes it a better
reproduction.”
I had no glimmer of what was in his mind, nor
did he enlighten me, but sat lost in thought until
we pulled up in the little Hampshire station. We
secured a ramshackle trap, and in a quarter of an
hour were at the house of our conﬁdential friend,
the sergeant.
“A clue, Mr. Holmes? What is it?”
“It all depends upon the behaviour of Dr. Wat-
son’s revolver,” said my friend. “Here it is. Now,
ofﬁcer, can you give me ten yards of string?”
The village shop provided a ball of stout twine.
“I think that this is all we will need,” said
Holmes. “Now, if you please, we will get off on
what I hope is the last stage of our journey.”
The sun was setting and turning the rolling
Hampshire moor into a wonderful autumnal
926
panorama. The sergeant, with many critical and in-
credulous glances, which showed his deep doubts
of the sanity of my companion, lurched along be-
side us. As we approached the scene of the crime
I could see that my friend under all his habitual
coolness was in truth deeply agitated.
“Yes,” he said in answer to my remark, “you
have seen me miss my mark before, Watson. I have
an instinct for such things, and yet it has sometimes
played me false. It seemed a certainty when ﬁrst
it ﬂashed across my mind in the cell at Winchester,
but one drawback of an active mind is that one
can always conceive alternative explanations which
would make our scent a false one. And yet—and
yet— Well, Watson, we can but try.”
As he walked he had ﬁrmly tied one end of
the string to the handle of the revolver. We had
now reached the scene of the tragedy. With great
care he marked out under the guidance of the po-
liceman the exact spot where the body had been
stretched. He then hunted among the heather and
the ferns until he found a considerable stone. This
he secured to the other end of his line of string,
and he hung it over the parapet of the bridge so
that it swung clear above the water. He then stood
on the fatal spot, some distance from the edge of
the bridge, with my revolver in his hand, the string
being taut between the weapon and the heavy stone
on the farther side.
“Now for it!” he cried.
At the words he raised the pistol to his head,
and then let go his grip. In an instant it had been
whisked away by the weight of the stone, had
struck with a sharp crack against the parapet, and
had vanished over the side into the water. It had
hardly gone before Holmes was kneeling beside the
stonework, and a joyous cry showed that he had
found what he expected.
“Was there ever a more exact demonstration?”
he cried. “See, Watson, your revolver has solved
the problem!” As he spoke he pointed to a sec-
ond chip of the exact size and shape of the ﬁrst
which had appeared on the under edge of the stone
balustrade.
“We’ll stay at the inn to-night,” he continued as
he rose and faced the astonished sergeant. “You
will, of course, get a grappling-hook and you will
easily restore my friend’s revolver. You will also
ﬁnd beside it the revolver, string and weight with
which this vindictive woman attempted to disguise
her own crime and to fasten a charge of murder
upon an innocent victim. You can let Mr. Gibson
know that I will see him in the morning, when
steps can be taken for Miss Dunbar’s vindication.”Late that evening, as we sat together smoking
our pipes in the village inn, Holmes gave me a brief
review of what had passed.
“I fear, Watson,” said he, “that you will not im-
prove any reputation which I may have acquired by
adding the case of the Thor Bridge mystery to your
annals. I have been sluggish in mind and wanting
in that mixture of imagination and reality which is
the basis of my art. I confess that the chip in the
stonework was a sufﬁcient clue to suggest the true
solution, and that I blame myself for not having
attained it sooner.
“It must be admitted that the workings of this
unhappy woman’s mind were deep and subtle, so
that it was no very simple matter to unravel her
plot. I do not think that in our adventures we have
ever come across a stranger example of what per-
verted love can bring about. Whether Miss Dunbar
was her rival in a physical or in a merely mental
sense seems to have been equally unforgivable in
her eyes. No doubt she blamed this innocent lady
for all those harsh dealings and unkind words with
which her husband tried to repel her too demon-
strative affection. Her ﬁrst resolution was to end
her own life. Her second was to do it in such a way
as to involve her victim in a fate which was worse
far than any sudden death could be.
“We can follow the various steps quite clearly,
and they show a remarkable subtlety of mind. A
note was extracted very cleverly from Miss Dunbar
which would make it appear that she had chosen
the scene of the crime. In her anxiety that it should
be discovered she somewhat overdid it by holding
it in her hand to the last. This alone should have
excited my suspicions earlier than it did.
“Then she took one of her husband’s re-
volvers—there was, as you saw, an arsenal in the
house—and kept it for her own use. A similar
one she concealed that morning in Miss Dunbar’s
wardrobe after discharging one barrel, which she
could easily do in the woods without attracting
attention. She then went down to the bridge
where she had contrived this exceedingly ingenious
method for getting rid of her weapon. When Miss
Dunbar appeared she used her last breath in pour-
ing out her hatred, and then, when she was out
of hearing, carried out her terrible purpose. Every
link is now in its place and the chain is complete.
The papers may ask why the mere was not dragged
in the ﬁrst instance, but it is easy to be wise after
the event, and in any case the expanse of a reed-
ﬁlled lake is no easy matter to drag unless you have
a clear perception of what you are looking for and
where. Well, Watson, we have helped a remark-
able woman, and also a formidable man. Should
927
TheProblem of Thor Bridge
they in the future join their forces, as seems not
unlikely, the ﬁnancial world may ﬁnd that Mr. NeilGibson has learned something in that schoolroom
of sorrow where our earthly lessons are taught.”
928
The Adventure of the Creeping Man

Mr. Sherlock Holmes was always of opin-
ion that I should publish the singular
facts connected with Professor Presbury,
if only to dispel once for all the ugly ru-
mours which some twenty years ago agitated the
university and were echoed in the learned societies
of London. There were, however, certain obstacles
in the way, and the true history of this curious case
remained entombed in the tin box which contains
so many records of my friend’s adventures. Now
we have at last obtained permission to ventilate the
facts which formed one of the very last cases han-
dled by Holmes before his retirement from practice.
Even now a certain reticence and discretion have to
be observed in laying the matter before the public.
It was one Sunday evening early in September
of the year 1903 that I received one of Holmes’s
laconic messages:
Come at once if convenient—if inconve-
nient come all the same.
— S. H.
The relations between us in those latter days
were peculiar. He was a man of habits, narrow and
concentrated habits, and I had become one of them.
As an institution I was like the violin, the shag
tobacco, the old black pipe, the index books, and
others perhaps less excusable. When it was a case
of active work and a comrade was needed upon
whose nerve he could place some reliance, my role
was obvious. But apart from this I had uses. I was
a whetstone for his mind. I stimulated him. He
liked to think aloud in my presence. His remarks
could hardly be said to be made to me—many of
them would have been as appropriately addressed
to his bedstead—but none the less, having formed
the habit, it had become in some way helpful that
I should register and interject. If I irritated him
by a certain methodical slowness in my mentality,
that irritation served only to make his own ﬂame-
like intuitions and impressions ﬂash up the more
vividly and swiftly. Such was my humble role in
our alliance.
When I arrived at Baker Street I found him hud-
dled up in his armchair with updrawn knees, his
pipe in his mouth and his brow furrowed with
thought. It was clear that he was in the throes of
some vexatious problem. With a wave of his hand
he indicated my old armchair, but otherwise for
half an hour he gave no sign that he was aware
of my presence. Then with a start he seemed to
come from his reverie, and with his usual whim-
sical smile he greeted me back to what had once
been my home.“You will excuse a certain abstraction of mind,
my dear Watson,” said he. “Some curious facts
have been submitted to me within the last twenty-
four hours, and they in turn have given rise to some
speculations of a more general character. I have se-
rious thoughts of writing a small monograph upon
the uses of dogs in the work of the detective.”
“But surely, Holmes, this has been explored,”
said I. “Bloodhounds—sleuth-hounds—”
“No, no, Watson, that side of the matter is, of
course, obvious. But there is another which is far
more subtle. You may recollect that in the case
which you, in your sensational way, coupled with
the Copper Beeches, I was able, by watching the
mind of the child, to form a deduction as to the
criminal habits of the very smug and respectable
father.”
“Yes, I remember it well.”
“My line of thoughts about dogs is analogous.
A dog reﬂects the family life. Whoever saw a frisky
dog in a gloomy family, or a sad dog in a happy
one? Snarling people have snarling dogs, danger-
ous people have dangerous ones. And their passing
moods may reﬂect the passing moods of others.”
I shook my head. “Surely, Holmes, this is a little
far-fetched,” said I.
He had reﬁlled his pipe and resumed his seat,
taking no notice of my comment.
“The practical application of what I have said is
very close to the problem which I am investigating.
It is a tangled skein, you understand, and I am
looking for a loose end. One possible loose end
lies in the question: Why does Professor Presbury’s
wolfhound, Roy, endeavour to bite him?”
I sank back in my chair in some disappointment.
Was it for so trivial a question as this that I had
been summoned from my work? Holmes glanced
across at me.
“The same old Watson!” said he. “You never
learn that the gravest issues may depend upon the
smallest things. But is it not on the face of it strange
that a staid, elderly philosopher—you’ve heard of
Presbury, of course, the famous Camford physiolo-
gist?—that such a man, whose friend has been his
devoted wolfhound, should now have been twice
attacked by his own dog? What do you make of
it?”
“The dog is ill.”
“Well, that has to be considered. But he attacks
no one else, nor does he apparently molest his
master, save on very special occasions. Curious,
Watson—very curious. But young Mr. Bennett is
931
TheAdventure of the Creeping Man
before his time if that is his ring. I had hoped to
have a longer chat with you before he came.”
There was a quick step on the stairs, a sharp
tap at the door, and a moment later the new client
presented himself. He was a tall, handsome youth
about thirty, well dressed and elegant, but with
something in his bearing which suggested the shy-
ness of the student rather than the self-possession
of the man of the world. He shook hands with
Holmes, and then looked with some surprise at
me.
“This matter is very delicate, Mr. Holmes,” he
said. “Consider the relation in which I stand to
Professor Presbury both privately and publicly. I
really can hardly justify myself if I speak before
any third person.”
“Have no fear, Mr. Bennett. Dr. Watson is the
very soul of discretion, and I can assure you that
this is a matter in which I am very likely to need
an assistant.”
“As you like, Mr. Holmes. You will, I am sure,
understand my having some reserves in the mat-
ter.”
“You will appreciate it, Watson, when I tell you
that this gentleman, Mr. Trevor Bennett, is profes-
sional assistant to the great scientist, lives under his
roof, and is engaged to his only daughter. Certainly
we must agree that the professor has every claim
upon his loyalty and devotion. But it may best be
shown by taking the necessary steps to clear up
this strange mystery.”
“I hope so, Mr. Holmes. That is my one object.
Does Dr. Watson know the situation?”
“I have not had time to explain it.”
“Then perhaps I had better go over the ground
again before explaining some fresh developments.”
“I will do so myself,” said Holmes, “in order to
show that I have the events in their due order. The
professor, Watson, is a man of European reputation.
His life has been academic. There has never been a
breath of scandal. He is a widower with one daugh-
ter, Edith. He is, I gather, a man of very virile and
positive, one might almost say combative, character.
So the matter stood until a very few months ago.
“Then the current of his life was broken. He is
sixty-one years of age, but he became engaged to
the daughter of Professor Morphy, his colleague in
the chair of comparative anatomy. It was not, as
I understand, the reasoned courting of an elderly
man but rather the passionate frenzy of youth, for
no one could have shown himself a more devoted
lover. The lady, Alice Morphy, was a very perfect
girl both in mind and body, so that there was everyexcuse for the professor’s infatuation. None the
less, it did not meet with full approval in his own
family.”
“We thought it rather excessive,” said our visi-
tor.
“Exactly. Excessive and a little violent and un-
natural. Professor Presbury was rich, however, and
there was no objection upon the part of the father.
The daughter, however, had other views, and there
were already several candidates for her hand, who,
if they were less eligible from a worldly point of
view, were at least more of an age. The girl seemed
to like the professor in spite of his eccentricities. It
was only age which stood in the way.
“About this time a little mystery suddenly
clouded the normal routine of the professor’s life.
He did what he had never done before. He left
home and gave no indication where he was go-
ing. He was away a fortnight and returned looking
rather travel-worn. He made no allusion to where
he had been, although he was usually the frankest
of men. It chanced, however, that our client here,
Mr. Bennett, received a letter from a fellow-student
in Prague, who said that he was glad to have seen
Professor Presbury there, although he had not been
able to talk to him. Only in this way did his own
household learn where he had been.
“Now comes the point. From that time onward
a curious change came over the professor. He be-
came furtive and sly. Those around him had always
the feeling that he was not the man that they had
known, but that he was under some shadow which
had darkened his higher qualities. His intellect was
not affected. His lectures were as brilliant as ever.
But always there was something new, something
sinister and unexpected. His daughter, who was
devoted to him, tried again and again to resume the
old relations and to penetrate this mask which her
father seemed to have put on. You, sir, as I under-
stand, did the same—but all was in vain. And now,
Mr. Bennett, tell in your own words the incident of
the letters.”
“You must understand, Dr. Watson, that the
professor had no secrets from me. If I were his
son or his younger brother I could not have more
completely enjoyed his conﬁdence. As his secre-
tary I handled every paper which came to him,
and I opened and subdivided his letters. Shortly
after his return all this was changed. He told me
that certain letters might come to him from London
which would be marked by a cross under the stamp.
These were to be set aside for his own eyes only. I
may say that several of these did pass through my
hands, that they had the E. C. mark, and were in
an illiterate handwriting. If he answered them at
932
all the answers did not pass through my hands nor
into the letter-basket in which our correspondence
was collected.”
“And the box,” said Holmes.
“Ah, yes, the box. The professor brought back a
little wooden box from his travels. It was the one
thing which suggested a Continental tour, for it
was one of those quaint carved things which one
associates with Germany. This he placed in his
instrument cupboard. One day, in looking for a
canula, I took up the box. To my surprise he was
very angry, and reproved me in words which were
quite savage for my curiosity. It was the ﬁrst time
such a thing had happened, and I was deeply hurt.
I endeavoured to explain that it was a mere acci-
dent that I had touched the box, but all the evening
I was conscious that he looked at me harshly and
that the incident was rankling in his mind.” Mr.
Bennett drew a little diary book from his pocket.
“That was on July 2d,” said he.
“You are certainly an admirable witness,” said
Holmes. “I may need some of these dates which
you have noted.”
“I learned method among other things from my
great teacher. From the time that I observed abnor-
mality in his behaviour I felt that it was my duty
to study his case. Thus I have it here that it was
on that very day, July 2d, that Roy attacked the
professor as he came from his study into the hall.
Again, on July 11th, there was a scene of the same
sort, and then I have a note of yet another upon
July20th. After that we had to banish Roy to the
stables. He was a dear, affectionate animal—but I
fear I weary you.”
Mr. Bennett spoke in a tone of reproach, for it
was very clear that Holmes was not listening. His
face was rigid and his eyes gazed abstractedly at
the ceiling. With an effort he recovered himself.
“Singular! Most singular!” he murmured.
“These details were new to me, Mr. Bennett. I think
we have now fairly gone over the old ground, have
we not? But you spoke of some fresh develop-
ments.”
The pleasant, open face of our visitor clouded
over, shadowed by some grim remembrance. “What
I speak of occurred the night before last,” said he.
“I was lying awake about two in the morning, when
I was aware of a dull mufﬂed sound coming from
the passage. I opened my door and peeped out. I
should explain that the professor sleeps at the end
of the passage—”
“The date being—?” asked Holmes.Our visitor was clearly annoyed at so irrelevant
an interruption.
“I have said, sir, that it was the night before
last—that is, September 4th.”
Holmes nodded and smiled.
“Pray continue,” said he.
“He sleeps at the end of the passage and would
have to pass my door in order to reach the staircase.
It was a really terrifying experience, Mr. Holmes.
I think that I am as strong-nerved as my neigh-
bours, but I was shaken by what I saw. The passage
was dark save that one window halfway along it
threw a patch of light. I could see that something
was coming along the passage, something dark and
crouching. Then suddenly it emerged into the light,
and I saw that it was he. He was crawling, Mr.
Holmes—crawling! He was not quite on his hands
and knees. I should rather say on his hands and
feet, with his face sunk between his hands. Yet he
seemed to move with ease. I was so paralyzed by
the sight that it was not until he had reached my
door that I was able to step forward and ask if I
could assist him. His answer was extraordinary.
He sprang up, spat out some atrocious word at me,
and hurried on past me, and down the staircase. I
waited about for an hour, but he did not come back.
It must have been daylight before he regained his
room.”
“Well, Watson, what make you of that?” asked
Holmes with the air of the pathologist who presents
a rare specimen.
“Lumbago, possibly. I have known a severe
attack make a man walk in just such a way, and
nothing would be more trying to the temper.”
“Good, Watson! You always keep us ﬂat-footed
on the ground. But we can hardly accept lumbago,
since he was able to stand erect in a moment.”
“He was never better in health,” said Bennett.
“In fact, he is stronger than I have known him for
years. But there are the facts, Mr. Holmes. It is not
a case in which we can consult the police, and yet
we are utterly at our wit’s end as to what to do, and
we feel in some strange way that we are drifting
towards disaster. Edith—Miss Presbury—feels as I
do, that we cannot wait passively any longer.”
“It is certainly a very curious and suggestive
case. What do you think, Watson?”
“Speaking as a medical man,” said I, “it appears
to be a case for an alienist. The old gentleman’s
cerebral processes were disturbed by the love affair.
He made a journey abroad in the hope of break-
ing himself of the passion. His letters and the box
933
TheAdventure of the Creeping Man
may be connected with some other private transac-
tion—a loan, perhaps, or share certiﬁcates, which
are in the box.”
“And the wolfhound no doubt disapproved of
the ﬁnancial bargain. No, no, Watson, there is more
in it than this. Now, I can only suggest—”
What Sherlock Holmes was about to suggest
will never be known, for at this moment the door
opened and a young lady was shown into the room.
As she appeared Mr. Bennett sprang up with a cry
and ran forward with his hands out to meet those
which she had herself outstretched.
“Edith, dear! Nothing the matter, I hope?”
“I felt I must follow you. Oh, Jack, I have been
so dreadfully frightened! It is awful to be there
alone.”
“Mr. Holmes, this is the young lady I spoke of.
This is my ﬁancee.”
“We were gradually coming to that conclusion,
were we not, Watson?” Holmes answered with a
smile. “I take it, Miss Presbury, that there is some
fresh development in the case, and that you thought
we should know?”
Our new visitor, a bright, handsome girl of a
conventional English type, smiled back at Holmes
as she seated herself beside Mr. Bennett.
“When I found Mr. Bennett had left his hotel
I thought I should probably ﬁnd him here. Of
course, he had told me that he would consult you.
But, oh, Mr. Holmes, can you do nothing for my
poor father?”
“I have hopes, Miss Presbury, but the case is
still obscure. Perhaps what you have to say may
throw some fresh light upon it.”
“It was last night, Mr. Holmes. He had been
very strange all day. I am sure that there are times
when he has no recollection of what he does. He
lives as in a strange dream. Yesterday was such a
day. It was not my father with whom I lived. His
outward shell was there, but it was not really he.”
“Tell me what happened.”
“I was awakened in the night by the dog bark-
ing most furiously. Poor Roy, he is chained now
near the stable. I may say that I always sleep with
my door locked; for, as Jack—as Mr. Bennett—will
tell you, we all have a feeling of impending danger.
My room is on the second ﬂoor. It happened that
the blind was up in my window, and there was
bright moonlight outside. As I lay with my eyes
ﬁxed upon the square of light, listening to the fren-
zied barkings of the dog, I was amazed to see my
father’s face looking in at me. Mr. Holmes, I nearlydied of surprise and horror. There it was pressed
against the window-pane, and one hand seemed to
be raised as if to push up the window. If that win-
dow had opened, I think I should have gone mad.
It was no delusion, Mr. Holmes. Don’t deceive
yourself by thinking so. I dare say it was twenty
seconds or so that I lay paralyzed and watched the
face. Then it vanished, but I could not—I could not
spring out of bed and look out after it. I lay cold
and shivering till morning. At breakfast he was
sharp and ﬁerce in manner, and made no allusion
to the adventure of the night. Neither did I, but
I gave an excuse for coming to town—and here I
am.”
Holmes looked thoroughly surprised at Miss
Presbury’s narrative.
“My dear young lady, you say that your room
is on the second ﬂoor. Is there a long ladder in the
garden?”
“No, Mr. Holmes, that is the amazing part of
it. There is no possible way of reaching the win-
dow—and yet he was there.”
“The date being September 5th,” said Holmes.
“That certainly complicates matters.”
It was the young lady’s turn to look surprised.
“This is the second time that you have alluded to
the date, Mr. Holmes,” said Bennett. “Is it possible
that it has any bearing upon the case?”
“It is possible—very possible—and yet I have
not my full material at present.”
“Possibly you are thinking of the connection
between insanity and phases of the moon?”
“No, I assure you. It was quite a different line
of thought. Possibly you can leave your notebook
with me, and I will check the dates. Now I think,
Watson, that our line of action is perfectly clear.
This young lady has informed us—and I have the
greatest conﬁdence in her intuition—that her father
remembers little or nothing which occurs upon cer-
tain dates. We will therefore call upon him as if he
had given us an appointment upon such a date. He
will put it down to his own lack of memory. Thus
we will open our campaign by having a good close
view of him.”
“That is excellent,” said Mr. Bennett. “I warn
you, however, that the professor is irascible and
violent at times.”
Holmes smiled. “There are reasons why we
should come at once—very cogent reasons if my
theories hold good. To-morrow, Mr. Bennett, will
certainly see us in Camford. There is, if I remem-
ber right, an inn called the Chequers where the
port used to be above mediocrity and the linen was
934
above reproach. I think, Watson, that our lot for the
next few days might lie in less pleasant places.”
Monday morning found us on our way to the
famous university town—an easy effort on the part
of Holmes, who had no roots to pull up, but one
which involved frantic planning and hurrying on
my part, as my practice was by this time not in-
considerable. Holmes made no allusion to the case
until after we had deposited our suitcases at the
ancient hostel of which he had spoken.
“I think, Watson, that we can catch the professor
just before lunch. He lectures at eleven and should
have an interval at home.”
“What possible excuse have we for calling?”
Holmes glanced at his notebook.
“There was a period of excitement upon August
26th. We will assume that he is a little hazy as to
what he does at such times. If we insist that we are
there by appointment I think he will hardly venture
to contradict us. Have you the effrontery necessary
to put it through?”
“We can but try.”
“Excellent, Watson! Compound of the Busy Bee
and Excelsior. We can but try—the motto of the
ﬁrm. A friendly native will surely guide us.”
Such a one on the back of a smart hansom swept
us past a row of ancient colleges and, ﬁnally turn-
ing into a tree-lined drive, pulled up at the door
of a charming house, girt round with lawns and
covered with purple wisteria. Professor Presbury
was certainly surrounded with every sign not only
of comfort but of luxury. Even as we pulled up, a
grizzled head appeared at the front window, and
we were aware of a pair of keen eyes from under
shaggy brows which surveyed us through large
horn glasses. A moment later we were actually in
his sanctum, and the mysterious scientist, whose va-
garies had brought us from London, was standing
before us. There was certainly no sign of eccen-
tricity either in his manner or appearance, for he
was a portly, large-featured man, grave, tall, and
frock-coated, with the dignity of bearing which a
lecturer needs. His eyes were his most remarkable
feature, keen, observant, and clever to the verge of
cunning.
He looked at our cards. “Pray sit down, gentle-
men. What can I do for you?”
Mr. Holmes smiled amiably.
“It was the question which I was about to put
to you, Professor.”
“To me, sir!”“Possibly there is some mistake. I heard
through a second person that Professor Presbury
of Camford had need of my services.”
“Oh, indeed!” It seemed to me that there was
a malicious sparkle in the intense gray eyes. “You
heard that, did you? May I ask the name of your
informant?”
“I am sorry, Professor, but the matter was rather
conﬁdential. If I have made a mistake there is no
harm done. I can only express my regret.”
“Not at all. I should wish to go further into
this matter. It interests me. Have you any scrap
of writing, any letter or telegram, to bear out your
assertion?”
“No, I have not.”
“I presume that you do not go so far as to assert
that I summoned you?”
“I would rather answer no questions,” said
Holmes.
“No, I dare say not,” said the professor with
asperity. “However, that particular one can be an-
swered very easily without your aid.”
He walked across the room to the bell. Our
London friend, Mr. Bennett, answered the call.
“Come in, Mr. Bennett. These two gentlemen
have come from London under the impression that
they have been summoned. You handle all my cor-
respondence. Have you a note of anything going
to a person named Holmes?”
“No, sir,” Bennett answered with a ﬂush.
“That is conclusive,” said the professor, glaring
angrily at my companion. “Now, sir”—he leaned
forward with his two hands upon the table—“it
seems to me that your position is a very question-
able one.”
Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
“I can only repeat that I am sorry that we have
made a needless intrusion.”
“Hardly enough, Mr. Holmes!” the old man
cried in a high screaming voice, with extraordinary
malignancy upon his face. He got between us and
the door as he spoke, and he shook his two hands
at us with furious passion. “You can hardly get
out of it so easily as that.” His face was convulsed,
and he grinned and gibbered at us in his senseless
rage. I am convinced that we should have had to
ﬁght our way out of the room if Mr. Bennett had
not intervened.
“My dear Professor,” he cried, “consider your
position! Consider the scandal at the university! Mr.
Holmes is a well-known man. You cannot possibly
treat him with such discourtesy.”
935
TheAdventure of the Creeping Man
Sulkily our host—if I may call him so—cleared
the path to the door. We were glad to ﬁnd our-
selves outside the house and in the quiet of the
tree-lined drive. Holmes seemed greatly amused
by the episode.
“Our learned friend’s nerves are somewhat out
of order,” said he. “Perhaps our intrusion was a
little crude, and yet we have gained that personal
contact which I desired. But, dear me, Watson, he
is surely at our heels. The villain still pursues us.”
There were the sounds of running feet behind,
but it was, to my relief, not the formidable profes-
sor but his assistant who appeared round the curve
of the drive. He came panting up to us.
“I am so sorry, Mr. Holmes. I wished to apolo-
gize.”
“My dear sir, there is no need. It is all in the
way of professional experience.”
“I have never seen him in a more dangerous
mood. But he grows more sinister. You can un-
derstand now why his daughter and I are alarmed.
And yet his mind is perfectly clear.”
“Too clear!” said Holmes. “That was my mis-
calculation. It is evident that his memory is much
more reliable than I had thought. By the way, can
we, before we go, see the window of Miss Pres-
bury’s room?”
Mr. Bennett pushed his way through some
shrubs, and we had a view of the side of the house.
“It is there. The second on the left.”
“Dear me, it seems hardly accessible. And yet
you will observe that there is a creeper below and
a water-pipe above which give some foothold.”
“I could not climb it myself,” said Mr. Bennett.
“Very likely. It would certainly be a dangerous
exploit for any normal man.”
“There was one other thing I wish to tell you,
Mr. Holmes. I have the address of the man in
London to whom the professor writes. He seems
to have written this morning, and I got it from
his blotting-paper. It is an ignoble position for a
trusted secretary, but what else can I do?”
Holmes glanced at the paper and put it into his
pocket.
“Dorak—a curious name. Slavonic, I imagine.
Well, it is an important link in the chain. We return
to London this afternoon, Mr. Bennett. I see no
good purpose to be served by our remaining. We
cannot arrest the professor because he has done no
crime, nor can we place him under constraint, for
he cannot be proved to be mad. No action is as yet
possible.”“Then what on earth are we to do?”
“A little patience, Mr. Bennett. Things will soon
develop. Unless I am mistaken, next Tuesday may
mark a crisis. Certainly we shall be in Camford
on that day. Meanwhile, the general position is
undeniably unpleasant, and if Miss Presbury can
prolong her visit—”
“That is easy.”
“Then let her stay till we can assure her that all
danger is past. Meanwhile, let him have his way
and do not cross him. So long as he is in a good
humour all is well.”
“There he is!” said Bennett in a startled whisper.
Looking between the branches we saw the tall, erect
ﬁgure emerge from the hall door and look around
him. He stood leaning forward, his hands swinging
straight before him, his head turning from side to
side. The secretary with a last wave slipped off
among the trees, and we saw him presently rejoin
his employer, the two entering the house together
in what seemed to be animated and even excited
conversation.
“I expect the old gentleman has been putting
two and two together,” said Holmes as we walked
hotelward. “He struck me as having a particularly
clear and logical brain from the little I saw of him.
Explosive, no doubt, but then from his point of
view he has something to explode about if detec-
tives are put on his track and he suspects his own
household of doing it. I rather fancy that friend
Bennett is in for an uncomfortable time.”
Holmes stopped at a post-ofﬁce and sent off a
telegram on our way. The answer reached us in the
evening, and he tossed it across to me.
Have visited the Commercial Road and
seen Dorak. Suave person, Bohemian,
elderly. Keeps large general store.
— M ercer .
“Mercer is since your time,” said Holmes. “He
is my general utility man who looks up routine
business. It was important to know something of
the man with whom our professor was so secretly
corresponding. His nationality connects up with
the Prague visit.”
“Thank goodness that something connects with
something,” said I. “At present we seem to be faced
by a long series of inexplicable incidents with no
bearing upon each other. For example, what pos-
sible connection can there be between an angry
wolfhound and a visit to Bohemia, or either of them
with a man crawling down a passage at night? As
936
to your dates, that is the biggest mystiﬁcation of
all.”
Holmes smiled and rubbed his hands. We were,
I may say, seated in the old sitting-room of the an-
cient hotel, with a bottle of the famous vintage of
which Holmes had spoken on the table between us.
“Well, now, let us take the dates ﬁrst,” said he,
his ﬁnger-tips together and his manner as if he were
addressing a class. “This excellent young man’s di-
ary shows that there was trouble upon July 2d, and
from then onward it seems to have been at nine-
day intervals, with, so far as I remember, only one
exception. Thus the last outbreak upon Friday was
on September 3d, which also falls into the series, as
did August 26th, which preceded it. The thing is
beyond coincidence.”
I was forced to agree.
“Let us, then, form the provisional theory that
every nine days the professor takes some strong
drug which has a passing but highly poisonous
effect. His naturally violent nature is intensiﬁed by
it. He learned to take this drug while he was in
Prague, and is now supplied with it by a Bohemian
intermediary in London. This all hangs together,
Watson!”
“But the dog, the face at the window, the creep-
ing man in the passage?”
“Well, well, we have made a beginning. I should
not expect any fresh developments until next Tues-
day. In the meantime we can only keep in touch
with friend Bennett and enjoy the amenities of this
charming town.”
In the morning Mr. Bennett slipped round to
bring us the latest report. As Holmes had imagined,
times had not been easy with him. Without exactly
accusing him of being responsible for our presence,
the professor had been very rough and rude in his
speech, and evidently felt some strong grievance.
This morning he was quite himself again, however,
and had delivered his usual brilliant lecture to a
crowded class. “Apart from his queer ﬁts,” said
Bennett, “he has actually more energy and vitality
than I can ever remember, nor was his brain ever
clearer. But it’s not he—it’s never the man whom
we have known.”
“I don’t think you have anything to fear now
for a week at least,” Holmes answered. “I am a
busy man, and Dr. Watson has his patients to at-
tend to. Let us agree that we meet here at this hour
next Tuesday, and I shall be surprised if before we
leave you again we are not able to explain, even
if we cannot perhaps put an end to, your troubles.
Meanwhile, keep us posted in what occurs.”I saw nothing of my friend for the next few days,
but on the following Monday evening I had a short
note asking me to meet him next day at the train.
From what he told me as we travelled up to Cam-
ford all was well, the peace of the professor’s house
had been unrufﬂed, and his own conduct perfectly
normal. This also was the report which was given
us by Mr. Bennett himself when he called upon us
that evening at our old quarters in the Chequers.
“He heard from his London correspondent to-day.
There was a letter and there was a small packet,
each with the cross under the stamp which warned
me not to touch them. There has been nothing
else.”
“That may prove quite enough,” said Holmes
grimly. “Now, Mr. Bennett, we shall, I think, come
to some conclusion to-night. If my deductions are
correct we should have an opportunity of bringing
matters to a head. In order to do so it is necessary
to hold the professor under observation. I would
suggest, therefore, that you remain awake and on
the lookout. Should you hear him pass your door,
do not interrupt him, but follow him as discreetly
as you can. Dr. Watson and I will not be far off. By
the way, where is the key of that little box of which
you spoke?”
“Upon his watch-chain.”
“I fancy our researches must lie in that direc-
tion. At the worst the lock should not be very
formidable. Have you any other able-bodied man
on the premises?”
“There is the coachman, Macphail.”
“Where does he sleep?”
“Over the stables.”
“We might possibly want him. Well, we can do
no more until we see how things develop. Good-
bye—but I expect that we shall see you before morn-
ing.”
It was nearly midnight before we took our sta-
tion among some bushes immediately opposite the
hall door of the professor. It was a ﬁne night, but
chilly, and we were glad of our warm overcoats.
There was a breeze, and clouds were scudding
across the sky, obscuring from time to time the half-
moon. It would have been a dismal vigil were it not
for the expectation and excitement which carried
us along, and the assurance of my comrade that
we had probably reached the end of the strange se-
quence of events which had engaged our attention.
“If the cycle of nine days holds good then we
shall have the professor at his worst to-night,” said
Holmes. “The fact that these strange symptoms
began after his visit to Prague, that he is in secret
correspondence with a Bohemian dealer in London,
937
TheAdventure of the Creeping Man
who presumably represents someone in Prague,
and that he received a packet from him this very
day, all point in one direction. What he takes and
why he takes it are still beyond our ken, but that it
emanates in some way from Prague is clear enough.
He takes it under deﬁnite directions which regu-
late this ninth-day system, which was the ﬁrst point
which attracted my attention. But his symptoms are
most remarkable. Did you observe his knuckles?”
I had to confess that I did not.
“Thick and horny in a way which is quite new
in my experience. Always look at the hands ﬁrst,
Watson. Then cuffs, trouser-knees, and boots. Very
curious knuckles which can only be explained by
the mode of progression observed by—” Holmes
paused and suddenly clapped his hand to his fore-
head. “Oh, Watson, Watson, what a fool I have
been! It seems incredible, and yet it must be true.
All points in one direction. How could I miss see-
ing the connection of ideas? Those knuckles—how
could I have passed those knuckles? And the dog!
And the ivy! It’s surely time that I disappeared into
that little farm of my dreams. Look out, Watson!
Here he is! We shall have the chance of seeing for
ourselves.”
The hall door had slowly opened, and against
the lamplit background we saw the tall ﬁgure of
Professor Presbury. He was clad in his dressing-
gown. As he stood outlined in the doorway he was
erect but leaning forward with dangling arms, as
when we saw him last.
Now he stepped forward into the drive, and
an extraordinary change came over him. He sank
down into a crouching position and moved along
upon his hands and feet, skipping every now and
then as if he were overﬂowing with energy and
vitality. He moved along the face of the house and
then round the corner. As he disappeared Bennett
slipped through the hall door and softly followed
him.
“Come, Watson, come!” cried Holmes, and we
stole as softly as we could through the bushes until
we had gained a spot whence we could see the
other side of the house, which was bathed in the
light of the half-moon. The professor was clearly
visible crouching at the foot of the ivy-covered wall.
As we watched him he suddenly began with in-
credible agility to ascend it. From branch to branch
he sprang, sure of foot and ﬁrm of grasp, climbing
apparently in mere joy at his own powers, with
no deﬁnite object in view. With his dressing-gown
ﬂapping on each side of him, he looked like some
huge bat glued against the side of his own house,
a great square dark patch upon the moonlit wall.Presently he tired of this amusement, and, drop-
ping from branch to branch, he squatted down
into the old attitude and moved towards the sta-
bles, creeping along in the same strange way as
before. The wolfhound was out now, barking furi-
ously, and more excited than ever when it actually
caught sight of its master. It was straining on its
chain and quivering with eagerness and rage. The
professor squatted down very deliberately just out
of reach of the hound and began to provoke it in
every possible way. He took handfuls of pebbles
from the drive and threw them in the dog’s face,
prodded him with a stick which he had picked up,
ﬂicked his hands about only a few inches from the
gaping mouth, and endeavoured in every way to in-
crease the animal’s fury, which was already beyond
all control. In all our adventures I do not know
that I have ever seen a more strange sight than
this impassive and still digniﬁed ﬁgure crouching
frog-like upon the ground and goading to a wilder
exhibition of passion the maddened hound, which
ramped and raged in front of him, by all manner
of ingenious and calculated cruelty.
And then in a moment it happened! It was
not the chain that broke, but it was the collar that
slipped, for it had been made for a thick-necked
Newfoundland. We heard the rattle of falling metal,
and the next instant dog and man were rolling on
the ground together, the one roaring in rage, the
other screaming in a strange shrill falsetto of ter-
ror. It was a very narrow thing for the professor’s
life. The savage creature had him fairly by the
throat, its fangs had bitten deep, and he was sense-
less before we could reach them and drag the two
apart. It might have been a dangerous task for us,
but Bennett’s voice and presence brought the great
wolfhound instantly to reason. The uproar had
brought the sleepy and astonished coachman from
his room above the stables. “I’m not surprised,”
said he, shaking his head. “I’ve seen him at it
before. I knew the dog would get him sooner or
later.”
The hound was secured, and together we car-
ried the professor up to his room, where Bennett,
who had a medical degree, helped me to dress his
torn throat. The sharp teeth had passed danger-
ously near the carotid artery, and the haemorrhage
was serious. In half an hour the danger was past, I
had given the patient an injection of morphia, and
he had sunk into deep sleep. Then, and only then,
were we able to look at each other and to take stock
of the situation.
“I think a ﬁrst-class surgeon should see him,”
said I.
938
“For God’s sake, no!” cried Bennett. “At present
the scandal is conﬁned to our own household. It
is safe with us. If it gets beyond these walls it will
never stop. Consider his position at the univer-
sity, his European reputation, the feelings of his
daughter.”
“Quite so,” said Holmes. “I think it may be
quite possible to keep the matter to ourselves, and
also to prevent its recurrence now that we have a
free hand. The key from the watch-chain, Mr. Ben-
nett. Macphail will guard the patient and let us
know if there is any change. Let us see what we
can ﬁnd in the professor’s mysterious box.”
There was not much, but there was enough—an
empty phial, another nearly full, a hypodermic sy-
ringe, several letters in a crabbed, foreign hand.
The marks on the envelopes showed that they were
those which had disturbed the routine of the sec-
retary, and each was dated from the Commercial
Road and signed “A. Dorak.” They were mere in-
voices to say that a fresh bottle was being sent
to Professor Presbury, or receipt to acknowledge
money. There was one other envelope, however, in
a more educated hand and bearing the Austrian
stamp with the postmark of Prague. “Here we
have our material!” cried Holmes as he tore out the
enclosure.
Honoured Colleague [it ran]:
Since your esteemed visit I have
thought much of your case, and though
in your circumstances there are some
special reasons for the treatment, I
would none the less enjoin caution, as
my results have shown that it is not
without danger of a kind.
It is possible that the serum of anthro-
poid would have been better. I have,
as I explained to you, used black-faced
langur because a specimen was accessi-
ble. Langur is, of course, a crawler and
climber, while anthropoid walks erect
and is in all ways nearer.
I beg you to take every possible pre-
caution that there be no premature rev-
elation of the process. I have one other
client in England, and Dorak is my
agent for both.
Weekly reports will oblige.
— Yours with high esteem,H. Lowenstein .
Lowenstein! The name brought back to me the
memory of some snippet from a newspaper which
spoke of an obscure scientist who was striving in
some unknown way for the secret of rejuvenescence
and the elixir of life. Lowenstein of Prague! Lowen-
stein with the wondrous strength-giving serum,
tabooed by the profession because he refused to
reveal its source. In a few words I said what I
remembered. Bennett had taken a manual of zool-
ogy from the shelves. “ ‘Langur,’ ” he read, “ ‘the
great black-faced monkey of the Himalayan slopes,
biggest and most human of climbing monkeys.’
Many details are added. Well, thanks to you, Mr.
Holmes, it is very clear that we have traced the evil
to its source.”
“The real source,” said Holmes, “lies, of course,
in that untimely love affair which gave our impetu-
ous professor the idea that he could only gain his
wish by turning himself into a younger man. When
one tries to rise above Nature one is liable to fall
below it. The highest type of man may revert to the
animal if he leaves the straight road of destiny.” He
sat musing for a little with the phial in his hand,
looking at the clear liquid within. “When I have
written to this man and told him that I hold him
criminally responsible for the poisons which he
circulates, we will have no more trouble. But it
may recur. Others may ﬁnd a better way. There
is danger there—a very real danger to humanity.
Consider, Watson, that the material, the sensual,
the worldly would all prolong their worthless lives.
The spiritual would not avoid the call to something
higher. It would be the survival of the least ﬁt.
What sort of cesspool may not our poor world be-
come?” Suddenly the dreamer disappeared, and
Holmes, the man of action, sprang from his chair.
“I think there is nothing more to be said, Mr. Ben-
nett. The various incidents will now ﬁt themselves
easily into the general scheme. The dog, of course,
was aware of the change far more quickly than you.
His smell would insure that. It was the monkey, not
the professor, whom Roy attacked, just as it was
the monkey who teased Roy. Climbing was a joy
to the creature, and it was a mere chance, I take it,
that the pastime brought him to the young lady’s
window. There is an early train to town, Watson,
but I think we shall just have time for a cup of tea
at the Chequers before we catch it.”
939

The Adventure of the Lion’s Mane

It is a most singular thing that a prob-
lem which was certainly as abstruse and
unusual as any which I have faced in
my long professional career should have
come to me after my retirement, and be brought,
as it were, to my very door. It occurred after my
withdrawal to my little Sussex home, when I had
given myself up entirely to that soothing life of
Nature for which I had so often yearned during the
long years spent amid the gloom of London. At
this period of my life the good Watson had passed
almost beyond my ken. An occasional week-end
visit was the most that I ever saw of him. Thus I
must act as my own chronicler. Ah! had he but
been with me, how much he might have made of
so wonderful a happening and of my eventual tri-
umph against every difﬁculty! As it is, however, I
must needs tell my tale in my own plain way, show-
ing by my words each step upon the difﬁcult road
which lay before me as I searched for the mystery
of the Lion’s Mane.
My villa is situated upon the southern slope of
the downs, commanding a great view of the Chan-
nel. At this point the coast-line is entirely of chalk
cliffs, which can only be descended by a single,
long, tortuous path, which is steep and slippery. At
the bottom of the path lie a hundred yards of peb-
bles and shingle, even when the tide is at full. Here
and there, however, there are curves and hollows
which make splendid swimming-pools ﬁlled afresh
with each ﬂow. This admirable beach extends for
some miles in each direction, save only at one point
where the little cove and village of Fulworth break
the line.
My house is lonely. I, my old housekeeper, and
my bees have the estate all to ourselves. Half a mile
off, however, is Harold Stackhurst’s well-known
coaching establishment, The Gables, quite a large
place, which contains some score of young fellows
preparing for various professions, with a staff of
several masters. Stackhurst himself was a well-
known rowing Blue in his day, and an excellent
all-round scholar. He and I were always friendly
from the day I came to the coast, and he was the
one man who was on such terms with me that we
could drop in on each other in the evenings without
an invitation.
Towards the end of July, 1907 , there was a se-
vere gale, the wind blowing up-channel, heaping
the seas to the base of the cliffs and leaving a la-
goon at the turn of the tide. On the morning of
which I speak the wind had abated, and all Nature
was newly washed and fresh. It was impossible to
work upon so delightful a day, and I strolled outbefore breakfast to enjoy the exquisite air. I walked
along the cliff path which led to the steep descent
to the beach. As I walked I heard a shout behind
me, and there was Harold Stackhurst waving his
hand in cheery greeting.
“What a morning, Mr. Holmes! I thought I
should see you out.”
“Going for a swim, I see.”
“At your old tricks again,” he laughed, patting
his bulging pocket. “Yes. McPherson started early,
and I expect I may ﬁnd him there.”
Fitzroy McPherson was the science master, a
ﬁne upstanding young fellow whose life had been
crippled by heart trouble following rheumatic fever.
He was a natural athlete, however, and excelled in
every game which did not throw too great a strain
upon him. Summer and winter he went for his
swim, and, as I am a swimmer myself, I have often
joined him.
At this moment we saw the man himself. His
head showed above the edge of the cliff where the
path ends. Then his whole ﬁgure appeared at the
top, staggering like a drunken man. The next in-
stant he threw up his hands and, with a terrible
cry, fell upon his face. Stackhurst and I rushed
forward—it may have been ﬁfty yards—and turned
him on his back. He was obviously dying. Those
glazed sunken eyes and dreadful livid cheeks could
mean nothing else. One glimmer of life came into
his face for an instant, and he uttered two or three
words with an eager air of warning. They were
slurred and indistinct, but to my ear the last of
them, which burst in a shriek from his lips, were
“the Lion’s Mane.” It was utterly irrelevant and
unintelligible, and yet I could twist the sound into
no other sense. Then he half raised himself from
the ground, threw his arms into the air, and fell
forward on his side. He was dead.
My companion was paralyzed by the sudden
horror of it, but I, as may well be imagined, had
every sense on the alert. And I had need, for it was
speedily evident that we were in the presence of an
extraordinary case. The man was dressed only in
his Burberry overcoat, his trousers, and an unlaced
pair of canvas shoes. As he fell over, his Burberry,
which had been simply thrown round his shoul-
ders, slipped off, exposing his trunk. We stared at it
in amazement. His back was covered with dark red
lines as though he had been terribly ﬂogged by a
thin wire scourge. The instrument with which this
punishment had been inﬂicted was clearly ﬂexible,
for the long, angry weals curved round his shoul-
ders and ribs. There was blood dripping down his
chin, for he had bitten through his lower lip in the
943
TheAdventure of the Lion’sMane
paroxysm of his agony. His drawn and distorted
face told how terrible that agony had been.
I was kneeling and Stackhurst standing by the
body when a shadow fell across us, and we found
that Ian Murdoch was by our side. Murdoch was
the mathematical coach at the establishment, a tall,
dark, thin man, so taciturn and aloof that none can
be said to have been his friend. He seemed to live
in some high, abstract region of surds and conic
sections, with little to connect him with ordinary
life. He was looked upon as an oddity by the stu-
dents, and would have been their butt, but there
was some strange outlandish blood in the man,
which showed itself not only in his coal-black eyes
and swarthy face but also in occasional outbreaks
of temper, which could only be described as fero-
cious. On one occasion, being plagued by a little
dog belonging to McPherson, he had caught the
creature up and hurled it through the plate-glass
window, an action for which Stackhurst would cer-
tainly have given him his dismissal had he not
been a very valuable teacher. Such was the strange
complex man who now appeared beside us. He
seemed to be honestly shocked at the sight before
him, though the incident of the dog may show that
there was no great sympathy between the dead
man and himself.
“Poor fellow! Poor fellow! What can I do? How
can I help?”
“Were you with him? Can you tell us what has
happened?”
“No, no, I was late this morning. I was not on
the beach at all. I have come straight from The
Gables. What can I do?”
“You can hurry to the police-station at Fulworth.
Report the matter at once.”
Without a word he made off at top speed, and I
proceeded to take the matter in hand, while Stack-
hurst, dazed at this tragedy, remained by the body.
My ﬁrst task naturally was to note who was on the
beach. From the top of the path I could see the
whole sweep of it, and it was absolutely deserted
save that two or three dark ﬁgures could be seen
far away moving towards the village of Fulworth.
Having satisﬁed myself upon this point, I walked
slowly down the path. There was clay or soft marl
mixed with the chalk, and every here and there I
saw the same footstep, both ascending and descend-
ing. No one else had gone down to the beach by
this track that morning. At one place I observed the
print of an open hand with the ﬁngers towards the
incline. This could only mean that poor McPherson
had fallen as he ascended. There were rounded de-
pressions, too, which suggested that he had comedown upon his knees more than once. At the bot-
tom of the path was the considerable lagoon left
by the retreating tide. At the side of it McPherson
had undressed, for there lay his towel on a rock.
It was folded and dry, so that it would seem that,
after all, he had never entered the water. Once or
twice as I hunted round amid the hard shingle I
came on little patches of sand where the print of
his canvas shoe, and also of his naked foot, could
be seen. The latter fact proved that he had made
all ready to bathe, though the towel indicated that
he had not actually done so.
And here was the problem clearly deﬁned—as
strange a one as had ever confronted me. The man
had not been on the beach more than a quarter of
an hour at the most. Stackhurst had followed him
from The Gables, so there could be no doubt about
that. He had gone to bathe and had stripped, as
the naked footsteps showed. Then he had suddenly
huddled on his clothes again—they were all dishev-
elled and unfastened—and he had returned with-
out bathing, or at any rate without drying himself.
And the reason for his change of purpose had been
that he had been scourged in some savage, inhu-
man fashion, tortured until he bit his lip through in
his agony, and was left with only strength enough
to crawl away and to die. Who had done this bar-
barous deed? There were, it is true, small grottos
and caves in the base of the cliffs, but the low sun
shone directly into them, and there was no place for
concealment. Then, again, there were those distant
ﬁgures on the beach. They seemed too far away to
have been connected with the crime, and the broad
lagoon in which McPherson had intended to bathe
lay between him and them, lapping up to the rocks.
On the sea two or three ﬁshing-boats were at no
great distance. Their occupants might be examined
at our leisure. There were several roads for inquiry,
but none which led to any very obvious goal.
When I at last returned to the body I found
that a little group of wondering folk had gathered
round it. Stackhurst was, of course, still there, and
Ian Murdoch had just arrived with Anderson, the
village constable, a big, ginger-moustached man of
the slow, solid Sussex breed—a breed which covers
much good sense under a heavy, silent exterior. He
listened to everything, took note of all we said, and
ﬁnally drew me aside.
“I’d be glad of your advice, Mr. Holmes. This
is a big thing for me to handle, and I’ll hear of it
from Lewes if I go wrong.”
I advised him to send for his immediate supe-
rior, and for a doctor; also to allow nothing to be
moved, and as few fresh footmarks as possible to be
made, until they came. In the meantime I searched
944
the dead man’s pockets. There were his handker-
chief, a large knife, and a small folding card-case.
From this projected a slip of paper, which I un-
folded and handed to the constable. There was
written on it in a scrawling, feminine hand:
I will be there, you may be sure.
— M audie .
It read like a love affair, an assignation, though
when and where were a blank. The constable re-
placed it in the card-case and returned it with the
other things to the pockets of the Burberry. Then, as
nothing more suggested itself, I walked back to my
house for breakfast, having ﬁrst arranged that the
base of the cliffs should be thoroughly searched.
Stackhurst was round in an hour or two to tell
me that the body had been removed to The Gables,
where the inquest would be held. He brought with
him some serious and deﬁnite news. As I expected,
nothing had been found in the small caves below
the cliff, but he had examined the papers in McPher-
son’s desk, and there were several which showed an
intimate correspondence with a certain Miss Maud
Bellamy, of Fulworth. We had then established the
identity of the writer of the note.
“The police have the letters,” he explained. “I
could not bring them. But there is no doubt that it
was a serious love affair. I see no reason, however,
to connect it with that horrible happening save, in-
deed, that the lady had made an appointment with
him.”
“But hardly at a bathing-pool which all of you
were in the habit of using,” I remarked.
“It is mere chance,” said he, “that several of the
students were not with McPherson.”
“Was it mere chance?”
Stackhurst knit his brows in thought.
“Ian Murdoch held them back,” said he. “He
would insist upon some algebraic demonstration
before breakfast. Poor chap, he is dreadfully cut up
about it all.”
“And yet I gather that they were not friends.”
“At one time they were not. But for a year or
more Murdoch has been as near to McPherson as
he ever could be to anyone. He is not of a very
sympathetic disposition by nature.”
“So I understand. I seem to remember your
telling me once about a quarrel over the ill-usage
of a dog.”
“That blew over all right.”
“But left some vindictive feeling, perhaps.”“No, no, I am sure they were real friends.”
“Well, then, we must explore the matter of the
girl. Do you know her?”
“Everyone knows her. She is the beauty of the
neighbourhood—a real beauty, Holmes, who would
draw attention everywhere. I knew that McPherson
was attracted by her, but I had no notion that it had
gone so far as these letters would seem to indicate.”
“But who is she?”
“She is the daughter of old Tom Bellamy, who
owns all the boats and bathing-cots at Fulworth.
He was a ﬁsherman to start with, but is now a man
of some substance. He and his son William run the
business.”
“Shall we walk into Fulworth and see them?”
“On what pretext?”
“Oh, we can easily ﬁnd a pretext. After all,
this poor man did not ill-use himself in this outra-
geous way. Some human hand was on the handle
of that scourge, if indeed it was a scourge which
inﬂicted the injuries. His circle of acquaintances in
this lonely place was surely limited. Let us follow
it up in every direction and we can hardly fail to
come upon the motive, which in turn should lead
us to the criminal.”
It would have been a pleasant walk across the
thyme-scented downs had our minds not been poi-
soned by the tragedy we had witnessed. The village
of Fulworth lies in a hollow curving in a semicircle
round the bay. Behind the old-fashioned hamlet
several modern houses have been built upon the
rising ground. It was to one of these that Stackhurst
guided me.
“That’s The Haven, as Bellamy called it. The
one with the corner tower and slate roof. Not bad
for a man who started with nothing but— By Jove,
look at that!”
The garden gate of The Haven had opened and
a man had emerged. There was no mistaking that
tall, angular, straggling ﬁgure. It was Ian Murdoch,
the mathematician. A moment later we confronted
him upon the road.
“Hullo!” said Stackhurst. The man nodded,
gave us a sideways glance from his curious dark
eyes, and would have passed us, but his principal
pulled him up.
“What were you doing there?” he asked.
Murdoch’s face ﬂushed with anger. “I am your
subordinate, sir, under your roof. I am not aware
that I owe you any account of my private actions.”
Stackhurst’s nerves were near the surface after
all he had endured. Otherwise, perhaps, he would
have waited. Now he lost his temper completely.
945
TheAdventure of the Lion’sMane
“In the circumstances your answer is pure im-
pertinence, Mr. Murdoch.”
“Your own question might perhaps come under
the same heading.”
“This is not the ﬁrst time that I have had to over-
look your insubordinate ways. It will certainly be
the last. You will kindly make fresh arrangements
for your future as speedily as you can.”
“I had intended to do so. I have lost to-day the
only person who made The Gables habitable.”
He strode off upon his way, while Stackhurst,
with angry eyes, stood glaring after him. “Is he not
an impossible, intolerable man?” he cried.
The one thing that impressed itself forcibly
upon my mind was that Mr. Ian Murdoch was
taking the ﬁrst chance to open a path of escape
from the scene of the crime. Suspicion, vague and
nebulous, was now beginning to take outline in
my mind. Perhaps the visit to the Bellamys might
throw some further light upon the matter. Stack-
hurst pulled himself together, and we went forward
to the house.
Mr. Bellamy proved to be a middle-aged man
with a ﬂaming red beard. He seemed to be in a
very angry mood, and his face was soon as ﬂorid
as his hair.
“No, sir, I do not desire any particulars. My
son here”—indicating a powerful young man, with
a heavy, sullen face, in the corner of the sitting-
room—“is of one mind with me that Mr. McPher-
son’s attentions to Maud were insulting. Yes, sir,
the word ‘marriage’ was never mentioned, and yet
there were letters and meetings, and a great deal
more of which neither of us could approve. She
has no mother, and we are her only guardians. We
are determined—”
But the words were taken from his mouth by
the appearance of the lady herself. There was no
gainsaying that she would have graced any assem-
bly in the world. Who could have imagined that
so rare a ﬂower would grow from such a root and
in such an atmosphere? Women have seldom been
an attraction to me, for my brain has always gov-
erned my heart, but I could not look upon her
perfect clear-cut face, with all the soft freshness of
the downlands in her delicate colouring, without
realizing that no young man would cross her path
unscathed. Such was the girl who had pushed open
the door and stood now, wide-eyed and intense, in
front of Harold Stackhurst.
“I know already that Fitzroy is dead,” she said.
“Do not be afraid to tell me the particulars.”“This other gentleman of yours let us know the
news,” explained the father.
“There is no reason why my sister should be
brought into the matter,” growled the younger man.
The sister turned a sharp, ﬁerce look upon him.
“This is my business, William. Kindly leave me to
manage it in my own way. By all accounts there
has been a crime committed. If I can help to show
who did it, it is the least I can do for him who is
gone.”
She listened to a short account from my compan-
ion, with a composed concentration which showed
me that she possessed strong character as well as
great beauty. Maud Bellamy will always remain in
my memory as a most complete and remarkable
woman. It seems that she already knew me by sight,
for she turned to me at the end.
“Bring them to justice, Mr. Holmes. You have
my sympathy and my help, whoever they may be.”
It seemed to me that she glanced deﬁantly at her
father and brother as she spoke.
“Thank you,” said I. “I value a woman’s instinct
in such matters. You use the word ‘they.’ You think
that more than one was concerned?”
“I knew Mr. McPherson well enough to be
aware that he was a brave and a strong man. No
single person could ever have inﬂicted such an out-
rage upon him.”
“Might I have one word with you alone?”
“I tell you, Maud, not to mix yourself up in the
matter,” cried her father angrily.
She looked at me helplessly. “What can I do?”
“The whole world will know the facts presently,
so there can be no harm if I discuss them here,”
said I. “I should have preferred privacy, but if your
father will not allow it he must share the deliber-
ations.” Then I spoke of the note which had been
found in the dead man’s pocket. “It is sure to be
produced at the inquest. May I ask you to throw
any light upon it that you can?”
“I see no reason for mystery,” she answered.
“We were engaged to be married, and we only kept
it secret because Fitzroy’s uncle, who is very old
and said to be dying, might have disinherited him
if he had married against his wish. There was no
other reason.”
“You could have told us,” growled Mr. Bellamy.
“So I would, father, if you had ever shown sym-
pathy.”
“I object to my girl picking up with men outside
her own station.”
946
“It was your prejudice against him which pre-
vented us from telling you. As to this appoint-
ment”—she fumbled in her dress and produced a
crumpled note—“it was in answer to this.”
Dearest [ran the message]:
The old place on the beach just after
sunset on Tuesday. It is the only time I
can get away.
— F. M.
“Tuesday was to-day, and I had meant to meet
him to-night.”
I turned over the paper. “This never came by
post. How did you get it?”
“I would rather not answer that question. It has
really nothing to do with the matter which you are
investigating. But anything which bears upon that
I will most freely answer.”
She was as good as her word, but there was
nothing which was helpful in our investigation.
She had no reason to think that her ﬁance had any
hidden enemy, but she admitted that she had had
several warm admirers.
“May I ask if Mr. Ian Murdoch was one of
them?”
She blushed and seemed confused.
“There was a time when I thought he was. But
that was all changed when he understood the rela-
tions between Fitzroy and myself.”
Again the shadow round this strange man
seemed to me to be taking more deﬁnite shape.
His record must be examined. His rooms must be
privately searched. Stackhurst was a willing collab-
orator, for in his mind also suspicions were forming.
We returned from our visit to The Haven with the
hope that one free end of this tangled skein was
already in our hands.
A week passed. The inquest had thrown no
light upon the matter and had been adjourned for
further evidence. Stackhurst had made discreet
inquiry about his subordinate, and there had been
a superﬁcial search of his room, but without re-
sult. Personally, I had gone over the whole ground
again, both physically and mentally, but with no
new conclusions. In all my chronicles the reader
will ﬁnd no case which brought me so completely
to the limit of my powers. Even my imagination
could conceive no solution to the mystery. And
then there came the incident of the dog.
It was my old housekeeper who heard of it ﬁrst
by that strange wireless by which such people col-
lect the news of the countryside.“Sad story this, sir, about Mr. McPherson’s dog,”
said she one evening.
I do not encourage such conversations, but the
words arrested my attention.
“What of Mr. McPherson’s dog?”
“Dead, sir. Died of grief for its master.”
“Who told you this?”
“Why, sir, everyone is talking of it. It took on
terrible, and has eaten nothing for a week. Then to-
day two of the young gentlemen from The Gables
found it dead—down on the beach, sir, at the very
place where its master met his end.”
“At the very place.” The words stood out clear
in my memory. Some dim perception that the mat-
ter was vital rose in my mind. That the dog should
die was after the beautiful, faithful nature of dogs.
But “in the very place”! Why should this lonely
beach be fatal to it? Was it possible that it also had
been sacriﬁced to some revengeful feud? Was it
possible—? Yes, the perception was dim, but al-
ready something was building up in my mind. In a
few minutes I was on my way to The Gables, where
I found Stackhurst in his study. At my request he
sent for Sudbury and Blount, the two students who
had found the dog.
“Yes, it lay on the very edge of the pool,” said
one of them. “It must have followed the trail of its
dead master.”
I saw the faithful little creature, an Airedale ter-
rier, laid out upon the mat in the hall. The body
was stiff and rigid, the eyes projecting, and the
limbs contorted. There was agony in every line of
it.
From The Gables I walked down to the bathing-
pool. The sun had sunk and the shadow of the
great cliff lay black across the water, which glim-
mered dully like a sheet of lead. The place was
deserted and there was no sign of life save for two
sea-birds circling and screaming overhead. In the
fading light I could dimly make out the little dog’s
spoor upon the sand round the very rock on which
his master’s towel had been laid. For a long time I
stood in deep meditation while the shadows grew
darker around me. My mind was ﬁlled with racing
thoughts. You have known what it was to be in
a nightmare in which you feel that there is some
all-important thing for which you search and which
you know is there, though it remains forever just be-
yond your reach. That was how I felt that evening
as I stood alone by that place of death. Then at last
I turned and walked slowly homeward.
I had just reached the top of the path when it
came to me. Like a ﬂash, I remembered the thing
for which I had so eagerly and vainly grasped. You
947
TheAdventure of the Lion’sMane
will know, or Watson has written in vain, that I hold
a vast store of out-of-the-way knowledge without
scientiﬁc system, but very available for the needs
of my work. My mind is like a crowded box-room
with packets of all sorts stowed away therein—so
many that I may well have but a vague perception
of what was there. I had known that there was
something which might bear upon this matter. It
was still vague, but at least I knew how I could
make it clear. It was monstrous, incredible, and yet
it was always a possibility. I would test it to the
full.
There is a great garret in my little house which
is stuffed with books. It was into this that I plunged
and rummaged for an hour. At the end of that time
I emerged with a little chocolate and silver volume.
Eagerly I turned up the chapter of which I had a
dim remembrance. Yes, it was indeed a far-fetched
and unlikely proposition, and yet I could not be at
rest until I had made sure if it might, indeed, be so.
It was late when I retired, with my mind eagerly
awaiting the work of the morrow.
But that work met with an annoying interrup-
tion. I had hardly swallowed my early cup of
tea and was starting for the beach when I had a
call from Inspector Bardle of the Sussex Constabu-
lary—a steady, solid, bovine man with thoughtful
eyes, which looked at me now with a very troubled
expression.
“I know your immense experience, sir,” said
he. “This is quite unofﬁcial, of course, and need
go no farther. But I am fairly up against it in this
McPherson case. The question is, shall I make an
arrest, or shall I not?”
“Meaning Mr. Ian Murdoch?”
“Yes, sir. There is really no one else when you
come to think of it. That’s the advantage of this soli-
tude. We narrow it down to a very small compass.
If he did not do it, then who did?”
“What have you against him?”
He had gleaned along the same furrows as I
had. There was Murdoch’s character and the mys-
tery which seemed to hang round the man. His
furious bursts of temper, as shown in the incident
of the dog. The fact that he had quarrelled with
McPherson in the past, and that there was some
reason to think that he might have resented his
attentions to Miss Bellamy. He had all my points,
but no fresh ones, save that Murdoch seemed to be
making every preparation for departure.
“What would my position be if I let him slip
away with all this evidence against him?” The burly,
phlegmatic man was sorely troubled in his mind.“Consider,” I said, “all the essential gaps in your
case. On the morning of the crime he can surely
prove an alibi. He had been with his scholars till the
last moment, and within a few minutes of McPher-
son’s appearance he came upon us from behind.
Then bear in mind the absolute impossibility that
he could single-handed have inﬂicted this outrage
upon a man quite as strong as himself. Finally,
there is this question of the instrument with which
these injuries were inﬂicted.”
“What could it be but a scourge or ﬂexible whip
of some sort?”
“Have you examined the marks?” I asked.
“I have seen them. So has the doctor.”
“But I have examined them very carefully with
a lens. They have peculiarities.”
“What are they, Mr. Holmes?”
I stepped to my bureau and brought out an en-
larged photograph. “This is my method in such
cases,” I explained.
“You certainly do things thoroughly, Mr.
Holmes.”
“I should hardly be what I am if I did not. Now
let us consider this weal which extends round the
right shoulder. Do you observe nothing remark-
able?”
“I can’t say I do.”
“Surely it is evident that it is unequal in its in-
tensity. There is a dot of extravasated blood here,
and another there. There are similar indications in
this other weal down here. What can that mean?”
“I have no idea. Have you?”
“Perhaps I have. Perhaps I haven’t. I may be
able to say more soon. Anything which will de-
ﬁne what made that mark will bring us a long way
towards the criminal.”
“It is, of course, an absurd idea,” said the po-
liceman, “but if a red-hot net of wire had been laid
across the back, then these better marked points
would represent where the meshes crossed each
other.”
“A most ingenious comparison. Or shall we say
a very stiff cat-o’-nine-tails with small hard knots
upon it?”
“By Jove, Mr. Holmes, I think you have hit it.”
“Or there may be some very different cause, Mr.
Bardle. But your case is far too weak for an ar-
rest. Besides, we have those last words—the ‘Lion’s
Mane.’ ”
“I have wondered whether Ian—”
“Yes, I have considered that. If the second word
had borne any resemblance to Murdoch—but it did
948
not. He gave it almost in a shriek. I am sure that it
was ‘Mane.’ ”
“Have you no alternative, Mr. Holmes?”
“Perhaps I have. But I do not care to discuss it
until there is something more solid to discuss.”
“And when will that be?”
“In an hour—possibly less.”
The inspector rubbed his chin and looked at me
with dubious eyes.
“I wish I could see what was in your mind, Mr.
Holmes. Perhaps it’s those ﬁshing-boats.”
“No, no, they were too far out.”
“Well, then, is it Bellamy and that big son of
his? They were not too sweet upon Mr. McPherson.
Could they have done him a mischief?”
“No, no, you won’t draw me until I am ready,”
said I with a smile. “Now, Inspector, we each have
our own work to do. Perhaps if you were to meet
me here at midday—”
So far we had got when there came the tremen-
dous interruption which was the beginning of the
end.
My outer door was ﬂung open, there were
blundering footsteps in the passage, and Ian Mur-
doch staggered into the room, pallid, dishevelled,
his clothes in wild disorder, clawing with his
bony hands at the furniture to hold himself erect.
“Brandy! Brandy!” he gasped, and fell groaning
upon the sofa.
He was not alone. Behind him came Stackhurst,
hatless and panting, almost as distrait as his com-
panion.
“Yes, yes, brandy!” he cried. “The man is at his
last gasp. It was all I could do to bring him here.
He fainted twice upon the way.”
Half a tumbler of the raw spirit brought about
a wondrous change. He pushed himself up on
one arm and swung his coat from his shoulders.
“For God’s sake, oil, opium, morphia!” he cried.
“Anything to ease this infernal agony!”
The inspector and I cried out at the sight. There,
crisscrossed upon the man’s naked shoulder, was
the same strange reticulated pattern of red, in-
ﬂamed lines which had been the death-mark of
Fitzroy McPherson.
The pain was evidently terrible and was more
than local, for the sufferer’s breathing would stop
for a time, his face would turn black, and then with
loud gasps he would clap his hand to his heart,
while his brow dropped beads of sweat. At any
moment he might die. More and more brandywas poured down his throat, each fresh dose bring-
ing him back to life. Pads of cotton-wool soaked in
salad-oil seemed to take the agony from the strange
wounds. At last his head fell heavily upon the cush-
ion. Exhausted Nature had taken refuge in its last
storehouse of vitality. It was half a sleep and half a
faint, but at least it was ease from pain.
To question him had been impossible, but the
moment we were assured of his condition Stack-
hurst turned upon me.
“My God!” he cried, “what is it, Holmes? What
is it?”
“Where did you ﬁnd him?”
“Down on the beach. Exactly where poor
McPherson met his end. If this man’s heart had
been weak as McPherson’s was, he would not be
here now. More than once I thought he was gone
as I brought him up. It was too far to The Gables,
so I made for you.”
“Did you see him on the beach?”
“I was walking on the cliff when I heard his cry.
He was at the edge of the water, reeling about like
a drunken man. I ran down, threw some clothes
about him, and brought him up. For heaven’s sake,
Holmes, use all the powers you have and spare
no pains to lift the curse from this place, for life
is becoming unendurable. Can you, with all your
world-wide reputation, do nothing for us?”
“I think I can, Stackhurst. Come with me now!
And you, Inspector, come along! We will see if we
cannot deliver this murderer into your hands.”
Leaving the unconscious man in the charge of
my housekeeper, we all three went down to the
deadly lagoon. On the shingle there was piled a
little heap of towels and clothes left by the stricken
man. Slowly I walked round the edge of the water,
my comrades in Indian ﬁle behind me. Most of the
pool was quite shallow, but under the cliff where
the beach was hollowed out it was four or ﬁve feet
deep. It was to this part that a swimmer would nat-
urally go, for it formed a beautiful pellucid green
pool as clear as crystal. A line of rocks lay above it
at the base of the cliff, and along this I led the way,
peering eagerly into the depths beneath me. I had
reached the deepest and stillest pool when my eyes
caught that for which they were searching, and I
burst into a shout of triumph.
“Cyanea!” I cried. “Cyanea! Behold the Lion’s
Mane!”
The strange object at which I pointed did in-
deed look like a tangled mass torn from the mane
of a lion. It lay upon a rocky shelf some three feet
under the water, a curious waving, vibrating, hairy
creature with streaks of silver among its yellow
949
TheAdventure of the Lion’sMane
tresses. It pulsated with a slow, heavy dilation and
contraction.
“It has done mischief enough. Its day is over!” I
cried. “Help me, Stackhurst! Let us end the mur-
derer forever.”
There was a big boulder just above the ledge,
and we pushed it until it fell with a tremendous
splash into the water. When the ripples had cleared
we saw that it had settled upon the ledge below.
One ﬂapping edge of yellow membrane showed
that our victim was beneath it. A thick oily scum
oozed out from below the stone and stained the
water round, rising slowly to the surface.
“Well, this gets me!” cried the inspector. “What
was it, Mr. Holmes? I’m born and bred in these
parts, but I never saw such a thing. It don’t belong
to Sussex.”
“Just as well for Sussex,” I remarked. “It may
have been the southwest gale that brought it up.
Come back to my house, both of you, and I will
give you the terrible experience of one who has
good reason to remember his own meeting with
the same peril of the seas.”
When we reached my study we found that Mur-
doch was so far recovered that he could sit up. He
was dazed in mind, and every now and then was
shaken by a paroxysm of pain. In broken words he
explained that he had no notion what had occurred
to him, save that terriﬁc pangs had suddenly shot
through him, and that it had taken all his fortitude
to reach the bank.
“Here is a book,” I said, taking up the little vol-
ume, “which ﬁrst brought light into what might
have been forever dark. It is Out of Doors , by the
famous observer, J. G. Wood. Wood himself very
nearly perished from contact with this vile creature,
so he wrote with a very full knowledge. Cyanea
capillata is the miscreant’s full name, and he can
be as dangerous to life as, and far more painful
than, the bite of the cobra. Let me brieﬂy give this
extract.
“If the bather should see a loose roundish
mass of tawny membranes and ﬁbres, some-
thing like very large handfuls of lion’s mane
and silver paper, let him beware, for this is
the fearful stinger, Cyanea capillata.
Could our sinister acquaintance be more clearly
described?
“He goes on to tell of his own encounter with
one when swimming off the coast of Kent. He
found that the creature radiated almost invisible ﬁl-
aments to the distance of ﬁfty feet, and that anyone
within that circumference from the deadly centrewas in danger of death. Even at a distance the effect
upon Wood was almost fatal.
“The multitudinous threads caused light
scarlet lines upon the skin which on closer
examination resolved into minute dots or
pustules, each dot charged as it were with a
red-hot needle making its way through the
nerves.
“The local pain was, as he explains, the least part
of the exquisite torment.
“Pangs shot through the chest, causing me
to fall as if struck by a bullet. The pulsa-
tion would cease, and then the heart would
give six or seven leaps as if it would force
its way through the chest.
“It nearly killed him, although he had only been
exposed to it in the disturbed ocean and not in
the narrow calm waters of a bathing-pool. He says
that he could hardly recognize himself afterwards,
so white, wrinkled and shrivelled was his face.
He gulped down brandy, a whole bottleful, and
it seems to have saved his life. There is the book,
Inspector. I leave it with you, and you cannot doubt
that it contains a full explanation of the tragedy of
poor McPherson.”
“And incidentally exonerates me,” remarked
Ian Murdoch with a wry smile. “I do not blame
you, Inspector, nor you, Mr. Holmes, for your sus-
picions were natural. I feel that on the very eve of
my arrest I have only cleared myself by sharing the
fate of my poor friend.”
“No, Mr. Murdoch. I was already upon the
track, and had I been out as early as I intended I
might well have saved you from this terriﬁc experi-
ence.”
“But how did you know, Mr. Holmes?”
“I am an omnivorous reader with a strangely re-
tentive memory for triﬂes. That phrase ‘the Lion’s
Mane’ haunted my mind. I knew that I had seen it
somewhere in an unexpected context. You have
seen that it does describe the creature. I have
no doubt that it was ﬂoating on the water when
McPherson saw it, and that this phrase was the
only one by which he could convey to us a warning
as to the creature which had been his death.”
“Then I, at least, am cleared,” said Murdoch,
rising slowly to his feet. “There are one or two
words of explanation which I should give, for I
know the direction in which your inquiries have
run. It is true that I loved this lady, but from the
day when she chose my friend McPherson my one
desire was to help her to happiness. I was well
content to stand aside and act as their go-between.
950
Often I carried their messages, and it was because
I was in their conﬁdence and because she was so
dear to me that I hastened to tell her of my friend’s
death, lest someone should forestall me in a more
sudden and heartless manner. She would not tell
you, sir, of our relations lest you should disapprove
and I might suffer. But with your leave I must try
to get back to The Gables, for my bed will be very
welcome.”
Stackhurst held out his hand. “Our nerves have
all been at concert-pitch,” said he. “Forgive what
is past, Murdoch. We shall understand each other
better in the future.” They passed out together with
their arms linked in friendly fashion. The inspector
remained, staring at me in silence with his ox-like
eyes.“Well, you’ve done it!” he cried at last. “I had
read of you, but I never believed it. It’s wonderful!”
I was forced to shake my head. To accept such
praise was to lower one’s own standards.
“I was slow at the outset—culpably slow. Had
the body been found in the water I could hardly
have missed it. It was the towel which misled me.
The poor fellow had never thought to dry himself,
and so I in turn was led to believe that he had never
been in the water. Why, then, should the attack of
any water creature suggest itself to me? That was
where I went astray. Well, well, Inspector, I often
ventured to chaff you gentlemen of the police force,
but Cyanea capillata very nearly avenged Scotland
Yard.”
951

The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger

When one considers that Mr. Sher-
lock Holmes was in active practice for
twenty-three years, and that during sev-
enteen of these I was allowed to cooper-
ate with him and to keep notes of his doings, it will
be clear that I have a mass of material at my com-
mand. The problem has always been not to ﬁnd
but to choose. There is the long row of year-books
which ﬁll a shelf, and there are the dispatch-cases
ﬁlled with documents, a perfect quarry for the stu-
dent not only of crime but of the social and ofﬁcial
scandals of the late Victorian era. Concerning these
latter, I may say that the writers of agonized letters,
who beg that the honour of their families or the
reputation of famous forebears may not be touched,
have nothing to fear. The discretion and high sense
of professional honour which have always distin-
guished my friend are still at work in the choice of
these memoirs, and no conﬁdence will be abused.
I deprecate, however, in the strongest way the at-
tempts which have been made lately to get at and
to destroy these papers. The source of these out-
rages is known, and if they are repeated I have
Mr. Holmes’s authority for saying that the whole
story concerning the politician, the lighthouse, and
the trained cormorant will be given to the public.
There is at least one reader who will understand.
It is not reasonable to suppose that every one of
these cases gave Holmes the opportunity of show-
ing those curious gifts of instinct and observation
which I have endeavoured to set forth in these mem-
oirs. Sometimes he had with much effort to pick
the fruit, sometimes it fell easily into his lap. But
the most terrible human tragedies were often in-
volved in those cases which brought him the fewest
personal opportunities, and it is one of these which
I now desire to record. In telling it, I have made a
slight change of name and place, but otherwise the
facts are as stated.
One forenoon—it was late in 1896 —I received
a hurried note from Holmes asking for my atten-
dance. When I arrived I found him seated in a
smoke-laden atmosphere, with an elderly, moth-
erly woman of the buxom landlady type in the
corresponding chair in front of him.
“This is Mrs. Merrilow, of South Brixton,” said
my friend with a wave of the hand. “Mrs. Merrilow
does not object to tobacco, Watson, if you wish to
indulge your ﬁlthy habits. Mrs. Merrilow has an
interesting story to tell which may well lead to fur-
ther developments in which your presence may be
useful.”
“Anything I can do—”“You will understand, Mrs. Merrilow, that if
I come to Mrs. Ronder I should prefer to have a
witness. You will make her understand that before
we arrive.”
“Lord bless you, Mr. Holmes,” said our visitor,
“she is that anxious to see you that you might bring
the whole parish at your heels!”
“Then we shall come early in the afternoon. Let
us see that we have our facts correct before we start.
If we go over them it will help Dr. Watson to un-
derstand the situation. You say that Mrs. Ronder
has been your lodger for seven years and that you
have only once seen her face.”
“And I wish to God I had not!” said Mrs. Mer-
rilow.
“It was, I understand, terribly mutilated.”
“Well, Mr. Holmes, you would hardly say it was
a face at all. That’s how it looked. Our milkman
got a glimpse of her once peeping out of the upper
window, and he dropped his tin and the milk all
over the front garden. That is the kind of face it is.
When I saw her—I happened on her unawares—she
covered up quick, and then she said, ‘Now, Mrs.
Merrilow, you know at last why it is that I never
raise my veil.’ ”
“Do you know anything about her history?”
“Nothing at all.”
“Did she give references when she came?”
“No, sir, but she gave hard cash, and plenty of it.
A quarter’s rent right down on the table in advance
and no arguing about terms. In these times a poor
woman like me can’t afford to turn down a chance
like that.”
“Did she give any reason for choosing your
house?”
“Mine stands well back from the road and is
more private than most. Then, again, I only take
the one, and I have no family of my own. I reckon
she had tried others and found that mine suited
her best. It’s privacy she is after, and she is ready
to pay for it.”
“You say that she never showed her face from
ﬁrst to last save on the one accidental occasion.
Well, it is a very remarkable story, most remarkable,
and I don’t wonder that you want it examined.”
“I don’t, Mr. Holmes. I am quite satisﬁed so
long as I get my rent. You could not have a quieter
lodger, or one who gives less trouble.”
“Then what has brought matters to a head?”
“Her health, Mr. Holmes. She seems to be wast-
ing away. And there’s something terrible on her
mind. ‘Murder!’ she cries. ‘Murder!’ And once
I heard her: ‘You cruel beast! You monster!’ she
cried. It was in the night, and it fair rang through
955
TheAdventure of the Veiled Lodger
the house and sent the shivers through me. So I
went to her in the morning. ‘Mrs. Ronder,’ I says,
‘if you have anything that is troubling your soul,
there’s the clergy,’ I says, ‘and there’s the police. Be-
tween them you should get some help.’ ‘For God’s
sake, not the police!’ says she, ‘and the clergy can’t
change what is past. And yet,’ she says, ‘it would
ease my mind if someone knew the truth before
I died.’ ‘Well,’ says I, ‘if you won’t have the reg-
ulars, there is this detective man what we read
about’—beggin’ your pardon, Mr. Holmes. And
she, she fair jumped at it. ‘That’s the man,’ says
she. ‘I wonder I never thought of it before. Bring
him here, Mrs. Merrilow, and if he won’t come, tell
him I am the wife of Ronder’s wild beast show. Say
that, and give him the name Abbas Parva. Here it
is as she wrote it, Abbas Parva. ‘That will bring
him if he’s the man I think he is.’ ”
“And it will, too,” remarked Holmes. “Very
good, Mrs. Merrilow. I should like to have a little
chat with Dr. Watson. That will carry us till lunch-
time. About three o’clock you may expect to see us
at your house in Brixton.”
Our visitor had no sooner waddled out of the
room—no other verb can describe Mrs. Merrilow’s
method of progression—than Sherlock Holmes
threw himself with ﬁerce energy upon the pile
of commonplace books in the corner. For a few
minutes there was a constant swish of the leaves,
and then with a grunt of satisfaction he came upon
what he sought. So excited was he that he did not
rise, but sat upon the ﬂoor like some strange Bud-
dha, with crossed legs, the huge books all round
him, and one open upon his knees.
“The case worried me at the time, Watson. Here
are my marginal notes to prove it. I confess that
I could make nothing of it. And yet I was con-
vinced that the coroner was wrong. Have you no
recollection of the Abbas Parva tragedy?”
“None, Holmes.”
“And yet you were with me then. But certainly
my own impression was very superﬁcial. For there
was nothing to go by, and none of the parties had
engaged my services. Perhaps you would care to
read the papers?”
“Could you not give me the points?”
“That is very easily done. It will probably come
back to your memory as I talk. Ronder, of course,
was a household word. He was the rival of Womb-
well, and of Sanger, one of the greatest showmen of
his day. There is evidence, however, that he took to
drink, and that both he and his show were on the
down grade at the time of the great tragedy. Thecaravan had halted for the night at Abbas Parva,
which is a small village in Berkshire, when this
horror occurred. They were on their way to Wim-
bledon, travelling by road, and they were simply
camping and not exhibiting, as the place is so small
a one that it would not have paid them to open.
“They had among their exhibits a very ﬁne
North African lion. Sahara King was its name,
and it was the habit, both of Ronder and his wife,
to give exhibitions inside its cage. Here, you see, is
a photograph of the performance by which you will
perceive that Ronder was a huge porcine person
and that his wife was a very magniﬁcent woman.
It was deposed at the inquest that there had been
some signs that the lion was dangerous, but, as
usual, familiarity begat contempt, and no notice
was taken of the fact.
“It was usual for either Ronder or his wife to
feed the lion at night. Sometimes one went, some-
times both, but they never allowed anyone else to
do it, for they believed that so long as they were the
food-carriers he would regard them as benefactors
and would never molest them. On this particular
night, seven years ago, they both went, and a very
terrible happening followed, the details of which
have never been made clear.
“It seems that the whole camp was roused near
midnight by the roars of the animal and the screams
of the woman. The different grooms and employ-
ees rushed from their tents, carrying lanterns, and
by their light an awful sight was revealed. Ronder
lay, with the back of his head crushed in and deep
claw-marks across his scalp, some ten yards from
the cage, which was open. Close to the door of
the cage lay Mrs. Ronder upon her back, with the
creature squatting and snarling above her. It had
torn her face in such a fashion that it was never
thought that she could live. Several of the circus
men, headed by Leonardo, the strong man, and
Griggs, the clown, drove the creature off with poles,
upon which it sprang back into the cage and was
at once locked in. How it had got loose was a mys-
tery. It was conjectured that the pair intended to
enter the cage, but that when the door was loosed
the creature bounded out upon them. There was
no other point of interest in the evidence save that
the woman in a delirium of agony kept screaming,
‘Coward! Coward!’ as she was carried back to the
van in which they lived. It was six months before
she was ﬁt to give evidence, but the inquest was
duly held, with the obvious verdict of death from
misadventure.”
“What alternative could be conceived?” said I.
956
“You may well say so. And yet there were one
or two points which worried young Edmunds, of
the Berkshire Constabulary. A smart lad that! He
was sent later to Allahabad. That was how I came
into the matter, for he dropped in and smoked a
pipe or two over it.”
“A thin, yellow-haired man?”
“Exactly. I was sure you would pick up the trail
presently.”
“But what worried him?”
“Well, we were both worried. It was so deucedly
difﬁcult to reconstruct the affair. Look at it from the
lion’s point of view. He is liberated. What does he
do? He takes half a dozen bounds forward, which
brings him to Ronder. Ronder turns to ﬂy—the
claw-marks were on the back of his head—but the
lion strikes him down. Then, instead of bounding
on and escaping, he returns to the woman, who
was close to the cage, and he knocks her over and
chews her face up. Then, again, those cries of hers
would seem to imply that her husband had in some
way failed her. What could the poor devil have
done to help her? You see the difﬁculty?”
“Quite.”
“And then there was another thing. It comes
back to me now as I think it over. There was some
evidence that just at the time the lion roared and
the woman screamed, a man began shouting in
terror.”
“This man Ronder, no doubt.”
“Well, if his skull was smashed in you would
hardly expect to hear from him again. There were
at least two witnesses who spoke of the cries of a
man being mingled with those of a woman.”
“I should think the whole camp was crying out
by then. As to the other points, I think I could
suggest a solution.”
“I should be glad to consider it.”
“The two were together, ten yards from the cage,
when the lion got loose. The man turned and was
struck down. The woman conceived the idea of
getting into the cage and shutting the door. It was
her only refuge. She made for it, and just as she
reached it the beast bounded after her and knocked
her over. She was angry with her husband for hav-
ing encouraged the beast’s rage by turning. If they
had faced it they might have cowed it. Hence her
cries of ‘Coward!’ ”
“Brilliant, Watson! Only one ﬂaw in your dia-
mond.”
“What is the ﬂaw, Holmes?”“If they were both ten paces from the cage, how
came the beast to get loose?”
“Is it possible that they had some enemy who
loosed it?”
“And why should it attack them savagely when
it was in the habit of playing with them, and doing
tricks with them inside the cage?”
“Possibly the same enemy had done something
to enrage it.”
Holmes looked thoughtful and remained in si-
lence for some moments.
“Well, Watson, there is this to be said for your
theory. Ronder was a man of many enemies. Ed-
munds told me that in his cups he was horrible.
A huge bully of a man, he cursed and slashed at
everyone who came in his way. I expect those cries
about a monster, of which our visitor has spoken,
were nocturnal reminiscences of the dear departed.
However, our speculations are futile until we have
all the facts. There is a cold partridge on the side-
board, Watson, and a bottle of Montrachet. Let
us renew our energies before we make a fresh call
upon them.”
When our hansom deposited us at the house of
Mrs. Merrilow, we found that plump lady blocking
up the open door of her humble but retired abode.
It was very clear that her chief preoccupation was
lest she should lose a valuable lodger, and she im-
plored us, before showing us up, to say and do
nothing which could lead to so undesirable an end.
Then, having reassured her, we followed her up the
straight, badly carpeted staircase and were shown
into the room of the mysterious lodger.
It was a close, musty, ill-ventilated place, as
might be expected, since its inmate seldom left it.
From keeping beasts in a cage, the woman seemed,
by some retribution of fate, to have become herself
a beast in a cage. She sat now in a broken armchair
in the shadowy corner of the room. Long years of
inaction had coarsened the lines of her ﬁgure, but
at some period it must have been beautiful, and
was still full and voluptuous. A thick dark veil cov-
ered her face, but it was cut off close at her upper
lip and disclosed a perfectly shaped mouth and a
delicately rounded chin. I could well conceive that
she had indeed been a very remarkable woman.
Her voice, too, was well modulated and pleasing.
“My name is not unfamiliar to you, Mr.
Holmes,” said she. “I thought that it would bring
you.”
“That is so, madam, though I do not know how
you are aware that I was interested in your case.”
“I learned it when I had recovered my health
and was examined by Mr. Edmunds, the county
957
TheAdventure of the Veiled Lodger
detective. I fear I lied to him. Perhaps it would
have been wiser had I told the truth.”
“It is usually wiser to tell the truth. But why
did you lie to him?”
“Because the fate of someone else depended
upon it. I know that he was a very worthless being,
and yet I would not have his destruction upon my
conscience. We had been so close—so close!”
“But has this impediment been removed?”
“Yes, sir. The person that I allude to is dead.”
“Then why should you not now tell the police
anything you know?”
“Because there is another person to be consid-
ered. That other person is myself. I could not stand
the scandal and publicity which would come from
a police examination. I have not long to live, but
I wish to die undisturbed. And yet I wanted to
ﬁnd one man of judgment to whom I could tell my
terrible story, so that when I am gone all might be
understood.”
“You compliment me, madam. At the same
time, I am a responsible person. I do not promise
you that when you have spoken I may not myself
think it my duty to refer the case to the police.”
“I think not, Mr. Holmes. I know your char-
acter and methods too well, for I have followed
your work for some years. Reading is the only plea-
sure which fate has left me, and I miss little which
passes in the world. But in any case, I will take
my chance of the use which you may make of my
tragedy. It will ease my mind to tell it.”
“My friend and I would be glad to hear it.”
The woman rose and took from a drawer the
photograph of a man. He was clearly a profes-
sional acrobat, a man of magniﬁcent physique,
taken with his huge arms folded across his swollen
chest and a smile breaking from under his heavy
moustache—the self-satisﬁed smile of the man of
many conquests.
“That is Leonardo,” she said.
“Leonardo, the strong man, who gave evi-
dence?”
“The same. And this—this is my husband.”
It was a dreadful face—a human pig, or rather a
human wild boar, for it was formidable in its bestial-
ity. One could imagine that vile mouth champing
and foaming in its rage, and one could conceive
those small, vicious eyes darting pure malignancy
as they looked forth upon the world. Rufﬁan, bully,
beast—it was all written on that heavy-jowled face.
“Those two pictures will help you, gentlemen,
to understand the story. I was a poor circus girlbrought up on the sawdust, and doing springs
through the hoop before I was ten. When I became
a woman this man loved me, if such lust as his can
be called love, and in an evil moment I became his
wife. From that day I was in hell, and he the devil
who tormented me. There was no one in the show
who did not know of his treatment. He deserted
me for others. He tied me down and lashed me
with his riding-whip when I complained. They all
pitied me and they all loathed him, but what could
they do? They feared him, one and all. For he was
terrible at all times, and murderous when he was
drunk. Again and again he was had up for assault,
and for cruelty to the beasts, but he had plenty of
money and the ﬁnes were nothing to him. The best
men all left us, and the show began to go downhill.
It was only Leonardo and I who kept it up—with
little Jimmy Griggs, the clown. Poor devil, he had
not much to be funny about, but he did what he
could to hold things together.
“Then Leonardo came more and more into my
life. You see what he was like. I know now the
poor spirit that was hidden in that splendid body,
but compared to my husband he seemed like the
angel Gabriel. He pitied me and helped me, till
at last our intimacy turned to love—deep, deep,
passionate love, such love as I had dreamed of but
never hoped to feel. My husband suspected it, but
I think that he was a coward as well as a bully, and
that Leonardo was the one man that he was afraid
of. He took revenge in his own way by torturing
me more than ever. One night my cries brought
Leonardo to the door of our van. We were near
tragedy that night, and soon my lover and I under-
stood that it could not be avoided. My husband
was not ﬁt to live. We planned that he should die.
“Leonardo had a clever, scheming brain. It was
he who planned it. I do not say that to blame him,
for I was ready to go with him every inch of the
way. But I should never have had the wit to think
of such a plan. We made a club—Leonardo made
it—and in the leaden head he fastened ﬁve long
steel nails, the points outward, with just such a
spread as the lion’s paw. This was to give my hus-
band his death-blow, and yet to leave the evidence
that it was the lion which we would loose who had
done the deed.
“It was a pitch-dark night when my husband
and I went down, as was our custom, to feed the
beast. We carried with us the raw meat in a zinc
pail. Leonardo was waiting at the corner of the
big van which we should have to pass before we
reached the cage. He was too slow, and we walked
past him before he could strike, but he followed us
on tiptoe and I heard the crash as the club smashed
958
my husband’s skull. My heart leaped with joy at
the sound. I sprang forward, and I undid the catch
which held the door of the great lion’s cage.
“And then the terrible thing happened. You
may have heard how quick these creatures are to
scent human blood, and how it excites them. Some
strange instinct had told the creature in one instant
that a human being had been slain. As I slipped the
bars it bounded out and was on me in an instant.
Leonardo could have saved me. If he had rushed
forward and struck the beast with his club he might
have cowed it. But the man lost his nerve. I heard
him shout in his terror, and then I saw him turn
and ﬂy. At the same instant the teeth of the lion
met in my face. Its hot, ﬁlthy breath had already
poisoned me and I was hardly conscious of pain.
With the palms of my hands I tried to push the
great steaming, blood-stained jaws away from me,
and I screamed for help. I was conscious that the
camp was stirring, and then dimly I remembered a
group of men. Leonardo, Griggs, and others, drag-
ging me from under the creature’s paws. That was
my last memory, Mr. Holmes, for many a weary
month. When I came to myself and saw myself
in the mirror, I cursed that lion—oh, how I cursed
him!—not because he had torn away my beauty but
because he had not torn away my life. I had but
one desire, Mr. Holmes, and I had enough money
to gratify it. It was that I should cover myself so
that my poor face should be seen by none, and that
I should dwell where none whom I had ever known
should ﬁnd me. That was all that was left to me to
do—and that is what I have done. A poor wounded
beast that has crawled into its hole to die—that is
the end of Eugenia Ronder.”
We sat in silence for some time after the un-
happy woman had told her story. Then Holmes
stretched out his long arm and patted her hand
with such a show of sympathy as I had seldom
known him to exhibit.
“Poor girl!” he said. “Poor girl! The ways of
fate are indeed hard to understand. If there is not
some compensation hereafter, then the world is a
cruel jest. But what of this man Leonardo?”
“I never saw him or heard from him again. Per-
haps I have been wrong to feel so bitterly against
him. He might as soon have loved one of the freaks
whom we carried round the country as the thing
which the lion had left. But a woman’s love is notso easily set aside. He had left me under the beast’s
claws, he had deserted me in my need, and yet I
could not bring myself to give him to the gallows.
For myself, I cared nothing what became of me.
What could be more dreadful than my actual life?
But I stood between Leonardo and his fate.”
“And he is dead?”
“He was drowned last month when bathing
near Margate. I saw his death in the paper.”
“And what did he do with this ﬁve-clawed club,
which is the most singular and ingenious part of
all your story?”
“I cannot tell, Mr. Holmes. There is a chalk-pit
by the camp, with a deep green pool at the base of
it. Perhaps in the depths of that pool—”
“Well, well, it is of little consequence now. The
case is closed.”
“Yes,” said the woman, “the case is closed.”
We had risen to go, but there was something in
the woman’s voice which arrested Holmes’s atten-
tion. He turned swiftly upon her.
“Your life is not your own,” he said. “Keep your
hands off it.”
“What use is it to anyone?”
“How can you tell? The example of patient suf-
fering is in itself the most precious of all lessons to
an impatient world.”
The woman’s answer was a terrible one. She
raised her veil and stepped forward into the light.
“I wonder if you would bear it,” she said.
It was horrible. No words can describe the
framework of a face when the face itself is gone.
Two living and beautiful brown eyes looking sadly
out from that grisly ruin did but make the view
more awful. Holmes held up his hand in a gesture
of pity and protest, and together we left the room.
Two days later, when I called upon my friend,
he pointed with some pride to a small blue bottle
upon his mantelpiece. I picked it up. There was a
red poison label. A pleasant almondy odour rose
when I opened it.
“Prussic acid?” said I.
“Exactly. It came by post. ‘I send you my temp-
tation. I will follow your advice.’ That was the
message. I think, Watson, we can guess the name
of the brave woman who sent it.”
959

The Adventure of Shoscombe Old Place

Sherlock Holmes had been bending for a
long time over a low-power microscope.
Now he straightened himself up and
looked round at me in triumph.
“It is glue, Watson,” said he. “Unquestionably
it is glue. Have a look at these scattered objects in
the ﬁeld!”
I stooped to the eyepiece and focussed for my
vision.
“Those hairs are threads from a tweed coat. The
irregular gray masses are dust. There are epithelial
scales on the left. Those brown blobs in the centre
are undoubtedly glue.”
“Well,” I said, laughing, “I am prepared to take
your word for it. Does anything depend upon it?”
“It is a very ﬁne demonstration,” he answered.
“In the St. Pancras case you may remember that
a cap was found beside the dead policeman. The
accused man denies that it is his. But he is a picture-
frame maker who habitually handles glue.”
“Is it one of your cases?”
“No; my friend, Merivale, of the Yard, asked me
to look into the case. Since I ran down that coiner
by the zinc and copper ﬁlings in the seam of his cuff
they have begun to realize the importance of the
microscope.” He looked impatiently at his watch.
“I had a new client calling, but he is overdue. By
the way, Watson, you know something of racing?”
“I ought to. I pay for it with about half my
wound pension.”
“Then I’ll make you my ‘Handy Guide to the
Turf.’ What about Sir Robert Norberton? Does the
name recall anything?”
“Well, I should say so. He lives at Shoscombe
Old Place, and I know it well, for my summer quar-
ters were down there once. Norberton nearly came
within your province once.”
“How was that?”
“It was when he horsewhipped Sam Brewer,
the well-known Curzon Street money-lender, on
Newmarket Heath. He nearly killed the man.”
“Ah, he sounds interesting! Does he often in-
dulge in that way?”
“Well, he has the name of being a dangerous
man. He is about the most daredevil rider in Eng-
land—second in the Grand National a few years
back. He is one of those men who have overshot
their true generation. He should have been a buck
in the days of the Regency—a boxer, an athlete, a
plunger on the turf, a lover of fair ladies, and, by
all account, so far down Queer Street that he may
never ﬁnd his way back again.”“Capital, Watson! A thumb-nail sketch. I seem
to know the man. Now, can you give me some idea
of Shoscombe Old Place?”
“Only that it is in the centre of Shoscombe Park,
and that the famous Shoscombe stud and training
quarters are to be found there.”
“And the head trainer,” said Holmes, “is John
Mason. You need not look surprised at my knowl-
edge, Watson, for this is a letter from him which
I am unfolding. But let us have some more about
Shoscombe. I seem to have struck a rich vein.”
“There are the Shoscombe spaniels,” said I.
“You hear of them at every dog show. The most
exclusive breed in England. They are the special
pride of the lady of Shoscombe Old Place.”
“Sir Robert Norberton’s wife, I presume!”
“Sir Robert has never married. Just as well, I
think, considering his prospects. He lives with his
widowed sister, Lady Beatrice Falder.”
“You mean that she lives with him?”
“No, no. The place belonged to her late hus-
band, Sir James. Norberton has no claim on it at all.
It is only a life interest and reverts to her husband’s
brother. Meantime, she draws the rents every year.”
“And brother Robert, I suppose, spends the said
rents?”
“That is about the size of it. He is a devil of a
fellow and must lead her a most uneasy life. Yet I
have heard that she is devoted to him. But what is
amiss at Shoscombe?”
“Ah, that is just what I want to know. And here,
I expect, is the man who can tell us.”
The door had opened and the page had shown
in a tall, clean-shaven man with the ﬁrm, austere ex-
pression which is only seen upon those who have to
control horses or boys. Mr. John Mason had many
of both under his sway, and he looked equal to
the task. He bowed with cold self-possession and
seated himself upon the chair to which Holmes had
waved him.
“You had my note, Mr. Holmes?”
“Yes, but it explained nothing.”
“It was too delicate a thing for me to put the
details on paper. And too complicated. It was only
face to face I could do it.”
“Well, we are at your disposal.”
“First of all, Mr. Holmes, I think that my em-
ployer, Sir Robert, has gone mad.”
Holmes raised his eyebrows. “This is Baker
Street, not Harley Street,” said he. “But why do
you say so?”
963
TheAdventure of Shoscombe OldPlace
“Well, sir, when a man does one queer thing,
or two queer things, there may be a meaning to
it, but when everything he does is queer, then you
begin to wonder. I believe Shoscombe Prince and
the Derby have turned his brain.”
“That is a colt you are running?”
“The best in England, Mr. Holmes. I should
know, if anyone does. Now, I’ll be plain with you,
for I know you are gentlemen of honour and that
it won’t go beyond the room. Sir Robert has got to
win this Derby. He’s up to the neck, and it’s his
last chance. Everything he could raise or borrow is
on the horse—and at ﬁne odds, too! You can get
forties now, but it was nearer the hundred when he
began to back him.”
“But how is that if the horse is so good?”
“The public don’t know how good he is. Sir
Robert has been too clever for the touts. He has the
Prince’s half-brother out for spins. You can’t tell
’em apart. But there are two lengths in a furlong
between them when it comes to a gallop. He thinks
of nothing but the horse and the race. His whole
life is on it. He’s holding off the Jews till then. If
the Prince fails him he is done.”
“It seems a rather desperate gamble, but where
does the madness come in?”
“Well, ﬁrst of all, you have only to look at him.
I don’t believe he sleeps at night. He is down at
the stables at all hours. His eyes are wild. It has
all been too much for his nerves. Then there is his
conduct to Lady Beatrice!”
“Ah! What is that?”
“They have always been the best of friends.
They had the same tastes, the two of them, and
she loved the horses as much as he did. Every
day at the same hour she would drive down to see
them—and, above all, she loved the Prince. He
would prick up his ears when he heard the wheels
on the gravel, and he would trot out each morning
to the carriage to get his lump of sugar. But that’s
all over now.”
“Why?”
“Well, she seems to have lost all interest in the
horses. For a week now she has driven past the
stables with never so much as ‘Good-morning’!”
“You think there has been a quarrel?”
“And a bitter, savage, spiteful quarrel at that.
Why else would he give away her pet spaniel that
she loved as if he were her child? He gave it a
few days ago to old Barnes, what keeps the Green
Dragon, three miles off, at Crendall.”
“That certainly did seem strange.”“Of course, with her weak heart and dropsy
one couldn’t expect that she could get about with
him, but he spent two hours every evening in her
room. He might well do what he could, for she has
been a rare good friend to him. But that’s all over,
too. He never goes near her. And she takes it to
heart. She is brooding and sulky and drinking, Mr.
Holmes—drinking like a ﬁsh.”
“Did she drink before this estrangement?”
“Well, she took her glass, but now it is often a
whole bottle of an evening. So Stephens, the butler,
told me. It’s all changed, Mr. Holmes, and there
is something damned rotten about it. But then,
again, what is master doing down at the old church
crypt at night? And who is the man that meets him
there?”
Holmes rubbed his hands.
“Go on, Mr. Mason. You get more and more
interesting.”
“It was the butler who saw him go. Twelve
o’clock at night and raining hard. So next night I
was up at the house and, sure enough, master was
off again. Stephens and I went after him, but it was
jumpy work, for it would have been a bad job if he
had seen us. He’s a terrible man with his ﬁsts if
he gets started, and no respecter of persons. So we
were shy of getting too near, but we marked him
down all right. It was the haunted crypt that he
was making for, and there was a man waiting for
him there.”
“What is this haunted crypt?”
“Well, sir, there is an old ruined chapel in the
park. It is so old that nobody could ﬁx its date.
And under it there’s a crypt which has a bad name
among us. It’s a dark, damp, lonely place by day,
but there are few in that county that would have
the nerve to go near it at night. But master’s not
afraid. He never feared anything in his life. But
what is he doing there in the night-time?”
“Wait a bit!” said Holmes. “You say there is
another man there. It must be one of your own
stablemen, or someone from the house! Surely you
have only to spot who it is and question him?”
“It’s no one I know.”
“How can you say that?”
“Because I have seen him, Mr. Holmes. It was
on that second night. Sir Robert turned and passed
us—me and Stephens, quaking in the bushes like
two bunny-rabbits, for there was a bit of moon that
night. But we could hear the other moving about
behind. We were not afraid of him. So we up when
Sir Robert was gone and pretended we were just
having a walk like in the moonlight, and so we
came right on him as casual and innocent as you
964
please. ‘Hullo, mate! who may you be?’ says I. I
guess he had not heard us coming, so he looked
over his shoulder with a face as if he had seen the
devil coming out of hell. He let out a yell, and away
he went as hard as he could lick it in the darkness.
He could run!—I’ll give him that. In a minute he
was out of sight and hearing, and who he was, or
what he was, we never found.”
“But you saw him clearly in the moonlight?”
“Yes, I would swear to his yellow face—a mean
dog, I should say. What could he have in common
with Sir Robert?”
Holmes sat for some time lost in thought.
“Who keeps Lady Beatrice Falder company?”
he asked at last.
“There is her maid, Carrie Evans. She has been
with her this ﬁve years.”
“And is, no doubt, devoted?”
Mr. Mason shufﬂed uncomfortably.
“She’s devoted enough,” he answered at last.
“But I won’t say to whom.”
“Ah!” said Holmes.
“I can’t tell tales out of school.”
“I quite understand, Mr. Mason. Of course, the
situation is clear enough. From Dr. Watson’s de-
scription of Sir Robert I can realize that no woman
is safe from him. Don’t you think the quarrel be-
tween brother and sister may lie there?”
“Well, the scandal has been pretty clear for a
long time.”
“But she may not have seen it before. Let us
suppose that she has suddenly found it out. She
wants to get rid of the woman. Her brother will
not permit it. The invalid, with her weak heart and
inability to get about, has no means of enforcing
her will. The hated maid is still tied to her. The
lady refuses to speak, sulks, takes to drink. Sir
Robert in his anger takes her pet spaniel away from
her. Does not all this hang together?”
“Well, it might do—so far as it goes.”
“Exactly! As far as it goes. How would all that
bear upon the visits by night to the old crypt? We
can’t ﬁt that into our plot.”
“No, sir, and there is something more that I
can’t ﬁt in. Why should Sir Robert want to dig up
a dead body?”
Holmes sat up abruptly.
“We only found it out yesterday—after I had
written to you. Yesterday Sir Robert had gone to
London, so Stephens and I went down to the crypt.It was all in order, sir, except that in one corner was
a bit of a human body.”
“You informed the police, I suppose?”
Our visitor smiled grimly.
“Well, sir, I think it would hardly interest them.
It was just the head and a few bones of a mummy. It
may have been a thousand years old. But it wasn’t
there before. That I’ll swear, and so will Stephens.
It had been stowed away in a corner and covered
over with a board, but that corner had always been
empty before.”
“What did you do with it?”
“Well, we just left it there.”
“That was wise. You say Sir Robert was away
yesterday. Has he returned?”
“We expect him back to-day.”
“When did Sir Robert give away his sister’s
dog?”
“It was just a week ago to-day. The creature was
howling outside the old well-house, and Sir Robert
was in one of his tantrums that morning. He caught
it up, and I thought he would have killed it. Then
he gave it to Sandy Bain, the jockey, and told him
to take the dog to old Barnes at the Green Dragon,
for he never wished to see it again.”
Holmes sat for some time in silent thought. He
had lit the oldest and foulest of his pipes.
“I am not clear yet what you want me to do in
this matter, Mr. Mason,” he said at last. “Can’t you
make it more deﬁnite?”
“Perhaps this will make it more deﬁnite, Mr.
Holmes,” said our visitor.
He took a paper from his pocket, and, unwrap-
ping it carefully, he exposed a charred fragment of
bone.
Holmes examined it with interest.
“Where did you get it?”
“There is a central heating furnace in the cellar
under Lady Beatrice’s room. It’s been off for some
time, but Sir Robert complained of cold and had
it on again. Harvey runs it—he’s one of my lads.
This very morning he came to me with this which
he found raking out the cinders. He didn’t like the
look of it.”
“Nor do I,” said Holmes. “What do you make
of it, Watson?”
It was burned to a black cinder, but there could
be no question as to its anatomical signiﬁcance.
“It’s the upper condyle of a human femur,” said
I.
“Exactly!” Holmes had become very serious.
“When does this lad tend to the furnace?”
965
TheAdventure of Shoscombe OldPlace
“He makes it up every evening and then leaves
it.”
“Then anyone could visit it during the night?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Can you enter it from outside?”
“There is one door from outside. There is an-
other which leads up by a stair to the passage in
which Lady Beatrice’s room is situated.”
“These are deep waters, Mr. Mason; deep and
rather dirty. You say that Sir Robert was not at
home last night?”
“No, sir.”
“Then, whoever was burning bones, it was not
he.”
“That’s true, sir.”
“What is the name of that inn you spoke of?”
“The Green Dragon.”
“Is there good ﬁshing in that part of Berkshire?”
The honest trainer showed very clearly upon his
face that he was convinced that yet another lunatic
had come into his harassed life.
“Well, sir, I’ve heard there are trout in the mill-
stream and pike in the Hall lake.”
“That’s good enough. Watson and I are famous
ﬁshermen—are we not, Watson? You may address
us in future at the Green Dragon. We should reach
it to-night. I need not say that we don’t want to
see you, Mr. Mason, but a note will reach us, and
no doubt I could ﬁnd you if I want you. When we
have gone a little farther into the matter I will let
you have a considered opinion.”
Thus it was that on a bright May evening
Holmes and I found ourselves alone in a ﬁrst-class
carriage and bound for the little “halt-on-demand”
station of Shoscombe. The rack above us was cov-
ered with a formidable litter of rods, reels, and
baskets. On reaching our destination a short drive
took us to an old-fashioned tavern, where a sport-
ing host, Josiah Barnes, entered eagerly into our
plans for the extirpation of the ﬁsh of the neigh-
bourhood.
“What about the Hall lake and the chance of a
pike?” said Holmes.
The face of the innkeeper clouded.
“That wouldn’t do, sir. You might chance to
ﬁnd yourself in the lake before you were through.”
“How’s that, then?”
“It’s Sir Robert, sir. He’s terrible jealous of touts.
If you two strangers were as near his training quar-
ters as that he’d be after you as sure as fate. He
ain’t taking no chances, Sir Robert ain’t.”“I’ve heard he has a horse entered for the
Derby.”
“Yes, and a good colt, too. He carries all our
money for the race, and all Sir Robert’s into the bar-
gain. By the way”—he looked at us with thoughtful
eyes—“I suppose you ain’t on the turf yourselves?”
“No, indeed. Just two weary Londoners who
badly need some good Berkshire air.”
“Well, you are in the right place for that. There
is a deal of it lying about. But mind what I have told
you about Sir Robert. He’s the sort that strikes ﬁrst
and speaks afterwards. Keep clear of the park.”
“Surely, Mr. Barnes! We certainly shall. By the
way, that was a most beautiful spaniel that was
whining in the hall.”
“I should say it was. That was the real
Shoscombe breed. There ain’t a better in England.”
“I am a dog-fancier myself,” said Holmes.
“Now, if it is a fair question, what would a prize
dog like that cost?”
“More than I could pay, sir. It was Sir Robert
himself who gave me this one. That’s why I have
to keep it on a lead. It would be off to the Hall in a
jiffy if I gave it its head.”
“We are getting some cards in our hand, Wat-
son,” said Holmes when the landlord had left us.
“It’s not an easy one to play, but we may see our
way in a day or two. By the way, Sir Robert is still
in London, I hear. We might, perhaps, enter the sa-
cred domain to-night without fear of bodily assault.
There are one or two points on which I should like
reassurance.”
“Have you any theory, Holmes?”
“Only this, Watson, that something happened
a week or so ago which has cut deep into the life
of the Shoscombe household. What is that some-
thing? We can only guess at it from its effects. They
seem to be of a curiously mixed character. But that
should surely help us. It is only the colourless,
uneventful case which is hopeless.
“Let us consider our data. The brother no longer
visits the beloved invalid sister. He gives away her
favourite dog. Her dog, Watson! Does that suggest
nothing to you?”
“Nothing but the brother’s spite.”
“Well, it might be so. Or—well, there is an alter-
native. Now to continue our review of the situation
from the time that the quarrel, if there is a quarrel,
began. The lady keeps her room, alters her habits,
is not seen save when she drives out with her maid,
refuses to stop at the stables to greet her favourite
horse, and apparently takes to drink. That covers
the case, does it not?”
966
“Save for the business in the crypt.”
“That is another line of thought. There are
two, and I beg you will not tangle them. Line
A, which concerns Lady Beatrice, has a vaguely
sinister ﬂavour, has it not?”
“I can make nothing of it.”
“Well, now, let us take up line B, which con-
cerns Sir Robert. He is mad keen upon winning
the Derby. He is in the hands of the Jews, and may
at any moment be sold up and his racing stables
seized by his creditors. He is a daring and desper-
ate man. He derives his income from his sister. His
sister’s maid is his willing tool. So far we seem to
be on fairly safe ground, do we not?”
“But the crypt?”
“Ah, yes, the crypt! Let us suppose, Watson—it
is merely a scandalous supposition, a hypothesis
put forward for argument’s sake—that Sir Robert
has done away with his sister.”
“My dear Holmes, it is out of the question.”
“Very possibly, Watson. Sir Robert is a man of
an honourable stock. But you do occasionally ﬁnd
a carrion crow among the eagles. Let us for a mo-
ment argue upon this supposition. He could not
ﬂy the country until he had realized his fortune,
and that fortune could only be realized by bringing
off this coup with Shoscombe Prince. Therefore, he
has still to stand his ground. To do this he would
have to dispose of the body of his victim, and he
would also have to ﬁnd a substitute who would
impersonate her. With the maid as his conﬁdante
that would not be impossible. The woman’s body
might be conveyed to the crypt, which is a place so
seldom visited, and it might be secretly destroyed
at night in the furnace, leaving behind it such ev-
idence as we have already seen. What say you to
that, Watson?”
“Well, it is all possible if you grant the original
monstrous supposition.”
“I think that there is a small experiment which
we may try to-morrow, Watson, in order to throw
some light on the matter. Meanwhile, if we mean to
keep up our characters, I suggest that we have our
host in for a glass of his own wine and hold some
high converse upon eels and dace, which seems
to be the straight road to his affections. We may
chance to come upon some useful local gossip in
the process.”
In the morning Holmes discovered that we had
come without our spoon-bait for jack, which ab-
solved us from ﬁshing for the day. About eleven
o’clock we started for a walk, and he obtained leave
to take the black spaniel with us.“This is the place,” said he as we came to two
high park gates with heraldic grifﬁns towering
above them. “About midday, Mr. Barnes informs
me, the old lady takes a drive, and the carriage
must slow down while the gates are opened. When
it comes through, and before it gathers speed, I
want you, Watson, to stop the coachman with some
question. Never mind me. I shall stand behind this
holly-bush and see what I can see.”
It was not a long vigil. Within a quarter of an
hour we saw the big open yellow barouche coming
down the long avenue, with two splendid, high-
stepping gray carriage horses in the shafts. Holmes
crouched behind his bush with the dog. I stood
unconcernedly swinging a cane in the roadway. A
keeper ran out and the gates swung open.
The carriage had slowed to a walk, and I was
able to get a good look at the occupants. A highly
coloured young woman with ﬂaxen hair and impu-
dent eyes sat on the left. At her right was an elderly
person with rounded back and a huddle of shawls
about her face and shoulders which proclaimed the
invalid. When the horses reached the highroad I
held up my hand with an authoritative gesture, and
as the coachman pulled up I inquired if Sir Robert
was at Shoscombe Old Place.
At the same moment Holmes stepped out and
released the spaniel. With a joyous cry it dashed
forward to the carriage and sprang upon the step.
Then in a moment its eager greeting changed to
furious rage, and it snapped at the black skirt above
it.
“Drive on! Drive on!” shrieked a harsh voice.
The coachman lashed the horses, and we were left
standing in the roadway.
“Well, Watson, that’s done it,” said Holmes as
he fastened the lead to the neck of the excited
spaniel. “He thought it was his mistress, and he
found it was a stranger. Dogs don’t make mis-
takes.”
“But it was the voice of a man!” I cried.
“Exactly! We have added one card to our hand,
Watson, but it needs careful playing, all the same.”
My companion seemed to have no further plans
for the day, and we did actually use our ﬁshing
tackle in the mill-stream, with the result that we
had a dish of trout for our supper. It was only after
that meal that Holmes showed signs of renewed
activity. Once more we found ourselves upon the
same road as in the morning, which led us to the
park gates. A tall, dark ﬁgure was awaiting us
there, who proved to be our London acquaintance,
Mr. John Mason, the trainer.
967
TheAdventure of Shoscombe OldPlace
“Good-evening, gentlemen,” said he. “I got
your note, Mr. Holmes. Sir Robert has not returned
yet, but I hear that he is expected to-night.”
“How far is this crypt from the house?” asked
Holmes.
“A good quarter of a mile.”
“Then I think we can disregard him altogether.”
“I can’t afford to do that, Mr. Holmes. The mo-
ment he arrives he will want to see me to get the
last news of Shoscombe Prince.”
“I see! In that case we must work without you,
Mr. Mason. You can show us the crypt and then
leave us.”
It was pitch-dark and without a moon, but Ma-
son led us over the grass-lands until a dark mass
loomed up in front of us which proved to be the an-
cient chapel. We entered the broken gap which was
once the porch, and our guide, stumbling among
heaps of loose masonry, picked his way to the cor-
ner of the building, where a steep stair led down
into the crypt. Striking a match, he illuminated the
melancholy place—dismal and evil-smelling, with
ancient crumbling walls of rough-hewn stone, and
piles of cofﬁns, some of lead and some of stone,
extending upon one side right up to the arched
and groined roof which lost itself in the shadows
above our heads. Holmes had lit his lantern, which
shot a tiny tunnel of vivid yellow light upon the
mournful scene. Its rays were reﬂected back from
the cofﬁn-plates, many of them adorned with the
grifﬁn and coronet of this old family which carried
its honours even to the gate of Death.
“You spoke of some bones, Mr. Mason. Could
you show them before you go?”
“They are here in this corner.” The trainer strode
across and then stood in silent surprise as our light
was turned upon the place. “They are gone,” said
he.
“So I expected,” said Holmes, chuckling. “I
fancy the ashes of them might even now be found
in that oven which had already consumed a part.”
“But why in the world would anyone want to
burn the bones of a man who has been dead a
thousand years?” asked John Mason.
“That is what we are here to ﬁnd out,” said
Holmes. “It may mean a long search, and we need
not detain you. I fancy that we shall get our solu-
tion before morning.”
When John Mason had left us, Holmes set to
work making a very careful examination of the
graves, ranging from a very ancient one, which
appeared to be Saxon, in the centre, through along line of Norman Hugos and Odos, until we
reached the Sir William and Sir Denis Falder of the
eighteenth century. It was an hour or more before
Holmes came to a leaden cofﬁn standing on end
before the entrance to the vault. I heard his little cry
of satisfaction and was aware from his hurried but
purposeful movements that he had reached a goal.
With his lens he was eagerly examining the edges
of the heavy lid. Then he drew from his pocket a
short jemmy, a box-opener, which he thrust into a
chink, levering back the whole front, which seemed
to be secured by only a couple of clamps. There
was a rending, tearing sound as it gave way, but
it had hardly hinged back and partly revealed the
contents before we had an unforeseen interruption.
Someone was walking in the chapel above. It
was the ﬁrm, rapid step of one who came with a
deﬁnite purpose and knew well the ground upon
which he walked. A light streamed down the
stairs, and an instant later the man who bore it
was framed in the Gothic archway. He was a terri-
ble ﬁgure, huge in stature and ﬁerce in manner. A
large stable-lantern which he held in front of him
shone upward upon a strong, heavily moustached
face and angry eyes, which glared round him into
every recess of the vault, ﬁnally ﬁxing themselves
with a deadly stare upon my companion and my-
self.
“Who the devil are you?” he thundered. “And
what are you doing upon my property?” Then, as
Holmes returned no answer, he took a couple of
steps forward and raised a heavy stick which he car-
ried. “Do you hear me?” he cried. “Who are you?
What are you doing here?” His cudgel quivered in
the air.
But instead of shrinking Holmes advanced to
meet him.
“I also have a question to ask you, Sir Robert,”
he said in his sternest tone. “Who is this? And
what is it doing here?”
He turned and tore open the cofﬁn-lid behind
him. In the glare of the lantern I saw a body
swathed in a sheet from head to foot, with dreadful,
witch-like features, all nose and chin, projecting at
one end, the dim, glazed eyes staring from a dis-
coloured and crumbling face.
The baronet had staggered back with a cry and
supported himself against a stone sarcophagus.
“How came you to know of this?” he cried. And
then, with some return of his truculent manner:
“What business is it of yours?”
“My name is Sherlock Holmes,” said my com-
panion. “Possibly it is familiar to you. In any case,
my business is that of every other good citizen—to
968
uphold the law. It seems to me that you have much
to answer for.”
Sir Robert glared for a moment, but Holmes’s
quiet voice and cool, assured manner had their
effect.
“ ‘Fore God, Mr. Holmes, it’s all right,” said he.
“Appearances are against me, I’ll admit, but I could
act no otherwise.”
“I should be happy to think so, but I fear your
explanations must be before the police.”
Sir Robert shrugged his broad shoulders.
“Well, if it must be, it must. Come up to the
house and you can judge for yourself how the mat-
ter stands.”
A quarter of an hour later we found ourselves
in what I judge, from the lines of polished barrels
behind glass covers, to be the gun-room of the old
house. It was comfortably furnished, and here Sir
Robert left us for a few moments. When he re-
turned he had two companions with him; the one,
the ﬂorid young woman whom we had seen in the
carriage; the other, a small rat-faced man with a
disagreeably furtive manner. These two wore an
appearance of utter bewilderment, which showed
that the baronet had not yet had time to explain to
them the turn events had taken.
“There,” said Sir Robert with a wave of his hand,
“are Mr. and Mrs. Norlett. Mrs. Norlett, under her
maiden name of Evans, has for some years been my
sister’s conﬁdential maid. I have brought them here
because I feel that my best course is to explain the
true position to you, and they are the two people
upon earth who can substantiate what I say.”
“Is this necessary, Sir Robert? Have you thought
what you are doing?” cried the woman.
“As to me, I entirely disclaim all responsibility,”
said her husband.
Sir Robert gave him a glance of contempt. “I
will take all responsibility,” said he. “Now, Mr.
Holmes, listen to a plain statement of the facts.
“You have clearly gone pretty deeply into my
affairs or I should not have found you where I did.
Therefore, you know already, in all probability, that
I am running a dark horse for the Derby and that
everything depends upon my success. If I win, all
is easy. If I lose—well, I dare not think of that!”
“I understand the position,” said Holmes.
“I am dependent upon my sister, Lady Beat-
rice, for everything. But it is well known that her
interest in the estate is for her own life only. For
myself, I am deeply in the hands of the Jews. I
have always known that if my sister were to diemy creditors would be on to my estate like a ﬂock
of vultures. Everything would be seized—my sta-
bles, my horses—everything. Well, Mr. Holmes, my
sister did die just a week ago.”
“And you told no one!”
“What could I do? Absolute ruin faced me. If
I could stave things off for three weeks all would
be well. Her maid’s husband—this man here—is
an actor. It came into our heads—it came into my
head—that he could for that short period personate
my sister. It was but a case of appearing daily in
the carriage, for no one need enter her room save
the maid. It was not difﬁcult to arrange. My sister
died of the dropsy which had long afﬂicted her.”
“That will be for a coroner to decide.”
“Her doctor would certify that for months her
symptoms have threatened such an end.”
“Well, what did you do?”
“The body could not remain there. On the ﬁrst
night Norlett and I carried it out to the old well-
house, which is now never used. We were followed,
however, by her pet spaniel, which yapped contin-
ually at the door, so I felt some safer place was
needed. I got rid of the spaniel, and we carried
the body to the crypt of the church. There was no
indignity or irreverence, Mr. Holmes. I do not feel
that I have wronged the dead.”
“Your conduct seems to me inexcusable, Sir
Robert.”
The baronet shook his head impatiently. “It
is easy to preach,” said he. “Perhaps you would
have felt differently if you had been in my position.
One cannot see all one’s hopes and all one’s plans
shattered at the last moment and make no effort
to save them. It seemed to me that it would be no
unworthy resting-place if we put her for the time in
one of the cofﬁns of her husband’s ancestors lying
in what is still consecrated ground. We opened
such a cofﬁn, removed the contents, and placed her
as you have seen her. As to the old relics which
we took out, we could not leave them on the ﬂoor
of the crypt. Norlett and I removed them, and he
descended at night and burned them in the central
furnace. There is my story, Mr. Holmes, though
how you forced my hand so that I have to tell it is
more than I can say.”
Holmes sat for some time lost in thought.
“There is one ﬂaw in your narrative, Sir Robert,”
he said at last. “Your bets on the race, and therefore
your hopes for the future, would hold good even if
your creditors seized your estate.”
“The horse would be part of the estate. What
do they care for my bets? As likely as not they
969
TheAdventure of Shoscombe OldPlace
would not run him at all. My chief creditor is, un-
happily, my most bitter enemy—a rascally fellow,
Sam Brewer, whom I was once compelled to horse-
whip on Newmarket Heath. Do you suppose that
he would try to save me?”
“Well, Sir Robert,” said Holmes, rising, “this
matter must, of course, be referred to the police. It
was my duty to bring the facts to light, and there
I must leave it. As to the morality or decency of
your conduct, it is not for me to express an opinion.
It is nearly midnight, Watson, and I think we may
make our way back to our humble abode.”
It is generally known now that this singu-lar episode ended upon a happier note than Sir
Robert’s actions deserved. Shoscombe Prince did
win the Derby, the sporting owner did net eighty
thousand pounds in bets, and the creditors did
hold their hand until the race was over, when they
were paid in full, and enough was left to reestab-
lish Sir Robert in a fair position in life. Both police
and coroner took a lenient view of the transaction,
and beyond a mild censure for the delay in register-
ing the lady’s decease, the lucky owner got away
scatheless from this strange incident in a career
which has now outlived its shadows and promises
to end in an honoured old age.
970
The Adventure of the Retired Colourman

Sherlock Holmes was in a melancholy
and philosophic mood that morning. His
alert practical nature was subject to such
reactions.
“Did you see him?” he asked.
“You mean the old fellow who has just gone
out?”
“Precisely.”
“Yes, I met him at the door.”
“What did you think of him?”
“A pathetic, futile, broken creature.”
“Exactly, Watson. Pathetic and futile. But is
not all life pathetic and futile? Is not his story a
microcosm of the whole? We reach. We grasp. And
what is left in our hands at the end? A shadow. Or
worse than a shadow—misery.”
“Is he one of your clients?”
“Well, I suppose I may call him so. He has been
sent on by the Yard. Just as medical men occasion-
ally send their incurables to a quack. They argue
that they can do nothing more, and that whatever
happens the patient can be no worse than he is.”
“What is the matter?”
Holmes took a rather soiled card from the table.
“Josiah Amberley. He says he was junior partner of
Brickfall and Amberley, who are manufacturers of
artistic materials. You will see their names upon
paint-boxes. He made his little pile, retired from
business at the age of sixty-one, bought a house at
Lewisham, and settled down to rest after a life of
ceaseless grind. One would think his future was
tolerably assured.”
“Yes, indeed.”
Holmes glanced over some notes which he had
scribbled upon the back of an envelope.
“Retired in 1896 , Watson. Early in 1897 he
married a woman twenty years younger than him-
self—a good-looking woman, too, if the photograph
does not ﬂatter. A competence, a wife, leisure—it
seemed a straight road which lay before him. And
yet within two years he is, as you have seen, as
broken and miserable a creature as crawls beneath
the sun.”
“But what has happened?”
“The old story, Watson. A treacherous friend
and a ﬁckle wife. It would appear that Amberley
has one hobby in life, and it is chess. Not far from
him at Lewisham there lives a young doctor who
is also a chess-player. I have noted his name as Dr.
Ray Ernest. Ernest was frequently in the house, and
an intimacy between him and Mrs. Amberley wasa natural sequence, for you must admit that our
unfortunate client has few outward graces, what-
ever his inner virtues may be. The couple went off
together last week—destination untraced. What is
more, the faithless spouse carried off the old man’s
deed-box as her personal luggage with a good part
of his life’s savings within. Can we ﬁnd the lady?
Can we save the money? A commonplace problem
so far as it has developed, and yet a vital one for
Josiah Amberley.”
“What will you do about it?”
“Well, the immediate question, my dear Watson,
happens to be, What will you do?—if you will be
good enough to understudy me. You know that I
am preoccupied with this case of the two Coptic
Patriarchs, which should come to a head to-day. I
really have not time to go out to Lewisham, and yet
evidence taken on the spot has a special value. The
old fellow was quite insistent that I should go, but
I explained my difﬁculty. He is prepared to meet a
representative.”
“By all means,” I answered. “I confess I don’t
see that I can be of much service, but I am willing to
do my best.” And so it was that on a summer after-
noon I set forth to Lewisham, little dreaming that
within a week the affair in which I was engaging
would be the eager debate of all England.
It was late that evening before I returned to
Baker Street and gave an account of my mission.
Holmes lay with his gaunt ﬁgure stretched in his
deep chair, his pipe curling forth slow wreaths of
acrid tobacco, while his eyelids drooped over his
eyes so lazily that he might almost have been asleep
were it not that at any halt or questionable passage
of my narrative they half lifted, and two gray eyes,
as bright and keen as rapiers, transﬁxed me with
their searching glance.
“The Haven is the name of Mr. Josiah Amber-
ley’s house,” I explained. “I think it would interest
you, Holmes. It is like some penurious patrician
who has sunk into the company of his inferiors.
You know that particular quarter, the monotonous
brick streets, the weary suburban highways. Right
in the middle of them, a little island of ancient cul-
ture and comfort, lies this old home, surrounded
by a high sun-baked wall mottled with lichens and
topped with moss, the sort of wall—”
“Cut out the poetry, Watson,” said Holmes
severely. “I note that it was a high brick wall.”
“Exactly. I should not have known which was
The Haven had I not asked a lounger who was
smoking in the street. I have a reason for mention-
ing him. He was a tall, dark, heavily moustached,
973
TheAdventure of the Retired Colourman
rather military-looking man. He nodded in answer
to my inquiry and gave me a curiously questioning
glance, which came back to my memory a little
later.
“I had hardly entered the gateway before I saw
Mr. Amberley coming down the drive. I only had a
glimpse of him this morning, and he certainly gave
me the impression of a strange creature, but when I
saw him in full light his appearance was even more
abnormal.”
“I have, of course, studied it, and yet I should be
interested to have your impression,” said Holmes.
“He seemed to me like a man who was liter-
ally bowed down by care. His back was curved
as though he carried a heavy burden. Yet he was
not the weakling that I had at ﬁrst imagined, for
his shoulders and chest have the framework of a
giant, though his ﬁgure tapers away into a pair of
spindled legs.”
“Left shoe wrinkled, right one smooth.”
“I did not observe that.”
“No, you wouldn’t. I spotted his artiﬁcial limb.
But proceed.”
“I was struck by the snaky locks of grizzled hair
which curled from under his old straw hat, and his
face with its ﬁerce, eager expression and the deeply
lined features.”
“Very good, Watson. What did he say?”
“He began pouring out the story of his
grievances. We walked down the drive together,
and of course I took a good look round. I have
never seen a worse-kept place. The garden was all
running to seed, giving me an impression of wild
neglect in which the plants had been allowed to
ﬁnd the way of Nature rather than of art. How any
decent woman could have tolerated such a state of
things, I don’t know. The house, too, was slatternly
to the last degree, but the poor man seemed himself
to be aware of it and to be trying to remedy it, for
a great pot of green paint stood in the centre of the
hall, and he was carrying a thick brush in his left
hand. He had been working on the woodwork.
“He took me into his dingy sanctum, and we
had a long chat. Of course, he was disappointed
that you had not come yourself. ‘I hardly expected,’
he said, ‘that so humble an individual as myself,
especially after my heavy ﬁnancial loss, could ob-
tain the complete attention of so famous a man as
Mr. Sherlock Holmes.’
“I assured him that the ﬁnancial question did
not arise. ‘No, of course, it is art for art’s sake
with him,’ said he, ‘but even on the artistic sideof crime he might have found something here to
study. And human nature, Dr. Watson—the black
ingratitude of it all! When did I ever refuse one
of her requests? Was ever a woman so pampered?
And that young man—he might have been my own
son. He had the run of my house. And yet see
how they have treated me! Oh, Dr. Watson, it is a
dreadful, dreadful world!’
“That was the burden of his song for an hour or
more. He had, it seems, no suspicion of an intrigue.
They lived alone save for a woman who comes in
by the day and leaves every evening at six. On that
particular evening old Amberley, wishing to give
his wife a treat, had taken two upper circle seats
at the Haymarket Theatre. At the last moment she
had complained of a headache and had refused to
go. He had gone alone. There seemed to be no
doubt about the fact, for he produced the unused
ticket which he had taken for his wife.”
“That is remarkable—most remarkable,” said
Holmes, whose interest in the case seemed to be ris-
ing. “Pray continue, Watson. I ﬁnd your narrative
most arresting. Did you personally examine this
ticket? You did not, perchance, take the number?”
“It so happens that I did,” I answered with some
pride. “It chanced to be my old school number,
thirty-one, and so is stuck in my head.”
“Excellent, Watson! His seat, then, was either
thirty or thirty-two.”
“Quite so,” I answered with some mystiﬁcation.
“And on B row.”
“That is most satisfactory. What else did he tell
you?”
“He showed me his strong-room, as he called it.
It really is a strong-room—like a bank—with iron
door and shutter—burglar-proof, as he claimed.
However, the woman seems to have had a dupli-
cate key, and between them they had carried off
some seven thousand pounds’ worth of cash and
securities.”
“Securities! How could they dispose of those?”
“He said that he had given the police a list
and that he hoped they would be unsaleable. He
had got back from the theatre about midnight and
found the place plundered, the door and window
open, and the fugitives gone. There was no letter
or message, nor has he heard a word since. He at
once gave the alarm to the police.”
Holmes brooded for some minutes.
“You say he was painting. What was he paint-
ing?”
“Well, he was painting the passage. But he had
already painted the door and woodwork of this
room I spoke of.”
974
“Does it not strike you as a strange occupation
in the circumstances?”
“ ‘One must do something to ease an aching
heart.’ That was his own explanation. It was eccen-
tric, no doubt, but he is clearly an eccentric man.
He tore up one of his wife’s photographs in my
presence—tore it up furiously in a tempest of pas-
sion. ‘I never wish to see her damned face again,’
he shrieked.”
“Anything more, Watson?”
“Yes, one thing which struck me more than any-
thing else. I had driven to the Blackheath Station
and had caught my train there when, just as it was
starting, I saw a man dart into the carriage next
to my own. You know that I have a quick eye for
faces, Holmes. It was undoubtedly the tall, dark
man whom I had addressed in the street. I saw
him once more at London Bridge, and then I lost
him in the crowd. But I am convinced that he was
following me.”
“No doubt! No doubt!” said Holmes. “A tall,
dark, heavily moustached man, you say, with gray-
tinted sun-glasses?”
“Holmes, you are a wizard. I did not say so, but
he had gray-tinted sun-glasses.”
“And a Masonic tie-pin?”
“Holmes!”
“Quite simple, my dear Watson. But let us get
down to what is practical. I must admit to you that
the case, which seemed to me to be so absurdly
simple as to be hardly worth my notice, is rapidly
assuming a very different aspect. It is true that
though in your mission you have missed every-
thing of importance, yet even those things which
have obtruded themselves upon your notice give
rise to serious thought.”
“What have I missed?”
“Don’t be hurt, my dear fellow. You know that I
am quite impersonal. No one else would have done
better. Some possibly not so well. But clearly you
have missed some vital points. What is the opinion
of the neighbours about this man Amberley and
his wife? That surely is of importance. What of Dr.
Ernest? Was he the gay Lothario one would expect?
With your natural advantages, Watson, every lady
is your helper and accomplice. What about the girl
at the post-ofﬁce, or the wife of the greengrocer?
I can picture you whispering soft nothings with
the young lady at the Blue Anchor, and receiving
hard somethings in exchange. All this you have left
undone.”
“It can still be done.”“It has been done. Thanks to the telephone and
the help of the Yard, I can usually get my essentials
without leaving this room. As a matter of fact, my
information conﬁrms the man’s story. He has the
local repute of being a miser as well as a harsh
and exacting husband. That he had a large sum
of money in that strong-room of his is certain. So
also is it that young Dr. Ernest, an unmarried man,
played chess with Amberley, and probably played
the fool with his wife. All this seems plain sailing,
and one would think that there was no more to be
said—and yet!—and yet!”
“Where lies the difﬁculty?”
“In my imagination, perhaps. Well, leave it
there, Watson. Let us escape from this weary worka-
day world by the side door of music. Carina sings
to-night at the Albert Hall, and we still have time
to dress, dine, and enjoy.”
In the morning I was up betimes, but some toast
crumbs and two empty egg-shells told me that my
companion was earlier still. I found a scribbled
note upon the table.
Dear Watson :
There are one or two points of contact
which I should wish to establish with
Mr. Josiah Amberley. When I have done
so we can dismiss the case—or not. I
would only ask you to be on hand about
three o’clock, as I conceive it possible
that I may want you.
— S. H.
I saw nothing of Holmes all day, but at the hour
named he returned, grave, preoccupied, and aloof.
At such times it was wiser to leave him to himself.
“Has Amberley been here yet?”
“No.”
“Ah! I am expecting him.”
He was not disappointed, for presently the old
fellow arrived with a very worried and puzzled
expression upon his austere face.
“I’ve had a telegram, Mr. Holmes. I can make
nothing of it.” He handed it over, and Holmes read
it aloud.
“Come at once without fail. Can give
you information as to your recent loss.
— “E lman .
“The Vicarage.
975
TheAdventure of the Retired Colourman
“Dispatched at 2.10from Little Purlington,” said
Holmes. “Little Purlington is in Essex, I believe, not
far from Frinton. Well, of course you will start at
once. This is evidently from a responsible person,
the vicar of the place. Where is my Crockford? Yes,
here we have him: ‘J. C. Elman, M. A., Living of
Moosmoor cum Little Purlington.’ Look up the
trains, Watson.”
“There is one at 5.20from Liverpool Street.”
“Excellent. You had best go with him, Watson.
He may need help or advice. Clearly we have come
to a crisis in this affair.”
But our client seemed by no means eager to
start.
“It’s perfectly absurd, Mr. Holmes,” he said.
“What can this man possibly know of what has
occurred? It is waste of time and money.”
“He would not have telegraphed to you if he
did not know something. Wire at once that you are
coming.”
“I don’t think I shall go.”
Holmes assumed his sternest aspect.
“It would make the worst possible impression
both on the police and upon myself, Mr. Amberley,
if when so obvious a clue arose you should refuse
to follow it up. We should feel that you were not
really in earnest in this investigation.”
Our client seemed horriﬁed at the suggestion.
“Why, of course I shall go if you look at it in that
way,” said he. “On the face of it, it seems absurd
to suppose that this person knows anything, but if
you think—”
“I do think,” said Holmes with emphasis, and
so we were launched upon our journey. Holmes
took me aside before we left the room and gave me
one word of counsel, which showed that he consid-
ered the matter to be of importance. “Whatever you
do, see that he really does go,” said he. “Should he
break away or return, get to the nearest telephone
exchange and send the single word ‘Bolted.’ I will
arrange here that it shall reach me wherever I am.”
Little Purlington is not an easy place to reach,
for it is on a branch line. My remembrance of
the journey is not a pleasant one, for the weather
was hot, the train slow, and my companion sullen
and silent, hardly talking at all save to make an
occasional sardonic remark as to the futility of our
proceedings. When we at last reached the little
station it was a two-mile drive before we came to
the Vicarage, where a big, solemn, rather pompous
clergyman received us in his study. Our telegram
lay before him.“Well, gentlemen,” he asked, “what can I do for
you?”
“We came,” I explained, “in answer to your
wire.”
“My wire! I sent no wire.”
“I mean the wire which you sent to Mr. Josiah
Amberley about his wife and his money.”
“If this is a joke, sir, it is a very questionable
one,” said the vicar angrily. “I have never heard
of the gentleman you name, and I have not sent a
wire to anyone.”
Our client and I looked at each other in amaze-
ment.
“Perhaps there is some mistake,” said I; “are
there perhaps two vicarages? Here is the wire itself,
signed Elman and dated from the Vicarage.”
“There is only one vicarage, sir, and only one
vicar, and this wire is a scandalous forgery, the ori-
gin of which shall certainly be investigated by the
police. Meanwhile, I can see no possible object in
prolonging this interview.”
So Mr. Amberley and I found ourselves on the
roadside in what seemed to me to be the most prim-
itive village in England. We made for the telegraph
ofﬁce, but it was already closed. There was a tele-
phone, however, at the little Railway Arms, and by
it I got into touch with Holmes, who shared in our
amazement at the result of our journey.
“Most singular!” said the distant voice. “Most
remarkable! I much fear, my dear Watson, that
there is no return train to-night. I have unwittingly
condemned you to the horrors of a country inn.
However, there is always Nature, Watson—Nature
and Josiah Amberley—you can be in close com-
mune with both.” I heard his dry chuckle as he
turned away.
It was soon apparent to me that my compan-
ion’s reputation as a miser was not undeserved. He
had grumbled at the expense of the journey, had
insisted upon travelling third-class, and was now
clamorous in his objections to the hotel bill. Next
morning, when we did at last arrive in London,
it was hard to say which of us was in the worse
humour.
“You had best take Baker Street as we pass,”
said I. “Mr. Holmes may have some fresh instruc-
tions.”
“If they are not worth more than the last ones
they are not of much use, ” said Amberley with a
malevolent scowl. None the less, he kept me com-
pany. I had already warned Holmes by telegram
of the hour of our arrival, but we found a message
waiting that he was at Lewisham and would expect
us there. That was a surprise, but an even greater
976
one was to ﬁnd that he was not alone in the sitting-
room of our client. A stern-looking, impassive man
sat beside him, a dark man with gray-tinted glasses
and a large Masonic pin projecting from his tie.
“This is my friend Mr. Barker,” said Holmes.
“He has been interesting himself also in your busi-
ness, Mr. Josiah Amberley, though we have been
working independently. But we both have the same
question to ask you!”
Mr. Amberley sat down heavily. He sensed im-
pending danger. I read it in his straining eyes and
his twitching features.
“What is the question, Mr. Holmes?”
“Only this: What did you do with the bodies?”
The man sprang to his feet with a hoarse scream.
He clawed into the air with his bony hands. His
mouth was open, and for the instant he looked
like some horrible bird of prey. In a ﬂash we got a
glimpse of the real Josiah Amberley, a misshapen
demon with a soul as distorted as his body. As
he fell back into his chair he clapped his hand to
his lips as if to stiﬂe a cough. Holmes sprang at
his throat like a tiger and twisted his face towards
the ground. A white pellet fell from between his
gasping lips.
“No short cuts, Josiah Amberley. Things must
be done decently and in order. What about it,
Barker?”
“I have a cab at the door,” said our taciturn
companion.
“It is only a few hundred yards to the station.
We will go together. You can stay here, Watson. I
shall be back within half an hour.”
The old colourman had the strength of a lion
in that great trunk of his, but he was helpless in
the hands of the two experienced man-handlers.
Wriggling and twisting he was dragged to the wait-
ing cab, and I was left to my solitary vigil in the
ill-omened house. In less time than he had named,
however, Holmes was back, in company with a
smart young police inspector.
“I’ve left Barker to look after the formalities,”
said Holmes. “You had not met Barker, Watson. He
is my hated rival upon the Surrey shore. When you
said a tall dark man it was not difﬁcult for me to
complete the picture. He has several good cases to
his credit, has he not, Inspector?”
“He has certainly interfered several times,” the
inspector answered with reserve.
“His methods are irregular, no doubt, like my
own. The irregulars are useful sometimes, you
know. You, for example, with your compulsorywarning about whatever he said being used against
him, could never have bluffed this rascal into what
is virtually a confession.”
“Perhaps not. But we get there all the same, Mr.
Holmes. Don’t imagine that we had not formed
our own views of this case, and that we would not
have laid our hands on our man. You will excuse
us for feeling sore when you jump in with methods
which we cannot use, and so rob us of the credit.”
“There shall be no such robbery, MacKinnon. I
assure you that I efface myself from now onward,
and as to Barker, he has done nothing save what I
told him.”
The inspector seemed considerably relieved.
“That is very handsome of you, Mr. Holmes.
Praise or blame can matter little to you, but it is
very different to us when the newspapers begin to
ask questions.”
“Quite so. But they are pretty sure to ask ques-
tions anyhow, so it would be as well to have an-
swers. What will you say, for example, when the
intelligent and enterprising reporter asks you what
the exact points were which aroused your suspi-
cion, and ﬁnally gave you a certain conviction as to
the real facts?”
The inspector looked puzzled.
“We don’t seem to have got any real facts yet,
Mr. Holmes. You say that the prisoner, in the pres-
ence of three witnesses, practically confessed by
trying to commit suicide, that he had murdered his
wife and her lover. What other facts have you?”
“Have you arranged for a search?”
“There are three constables on their way.”
“Then you will soon get the clearest fact of all.
The bodies cannot be far away. Try the cellars and
the garden. It should not take long to dig up the
likely places. This house is older than the water-
pipes. There must be a disused well somewhere.
Try your luck there.”
“But how did you know of it, and how was it
done?”
“I’ll show you ﬁrst how it was done, and then I
will give the explanation which is due to you, and
even more to my long-suffering friend here, who
has been invaluable throughout. But, ﬁrst, I would
give you an insight into this man’s mentality. It is
a very unusual one—so much so that I think his
destination is more likely to be Broadmoor than the
scaffold. He has, to a high degree, the sort of mind
which one associates with the mediaeval Italian na-
ture rather than with the modern Briton. He was a
miserable miser who made his wife so wretched by
his niggardly ways that she was a ready prey for
any adventurer. Such a one came upon the scene in
977
TheAdventure of the Retired Colourman
the person of this chess-playing doctor. Amberley
excelled at chess—one mark, Watson, of a schem-
ing mind. Like all misers, he was a jealous man,
and his jealousy became a frantic mania. Rightly
or wrongly, he suspected an intrigue. He deter-
mined to have his revenge, and he planned it with
diabolical cleverness. Come here!”
Holmes led us along the passage with as much
certainty as if he had lived in the house and halted
at the open door of the strong-room.
“Pooh! What an awful smell of paint!” cried the
inspector.
“That was our ﬁrst clue,” said Holmes. “You
can thank Dr. Watson’s observation for that, though
he failed to draw the inference. It set my foot upon
the trail. Why should this man at such a time be
ﬁlling his house with strong odours? Obviously,
to cover some other smell which he wished to con-
ceal—some guilty smell which would suggest sus-
picions. Then came the idea of a room such as
you see here with iron door and shutter—a hermet-
ically sealed room. Put those two facts together,
and whither do they lead? I could only determine
that by examining the house myself. I was already
certain that the case was serious, for I had exam-
ined the box-ofﬁce chart at the Haymarket The-
atre—another of Dr. Watson’s bull’s-eyes—and as-
certained that neither B thirty nor thirty-two of the
upper circle had been occupied that night. There-
fore, Amberley had not been to the theatre, and his
alibi fell to the ground. He made a bad slip when
he allowed my astute friend to notice the number
of the seat taken for his wife. The question now
arose how I might be able to examine the house. I
sent an agent to the most impossible village I could
think of, and summoned my man to it at such an
hour that he could not possibly get back. To pre-
vent any miscarriage, Dr. Watson accompanied him.
The good vicar’s name I took, of course, out of my
Crockford. Do I make it all clear to you?”
“It is masterly,” said the inspector in an awed
voice.
“There being no fear of interruption I proceeded
to burgle the house. Burglary has always been an
alternative profession had I cared to adopt it, and
I have little doubt that I should have come to the
front. Observe what I found. You see the gas-pipe
along the skirting here. Very good. It rises in the
angle of the wall, and there is a tap here in the
corner. The pipe runs out into the strong-room, as
you can see, and ends in that plaster rose in the
centre of the ceiling, where it is concealed by the
ornamentation. That end is wide open. At any
moment by turning the outside tap the room couldbe ﬂooded with gas. With door and shutter closed
and the tap full on I would not give two minutes of
conscious sensation to anyone shut up in that little
chamber. By what devilish device he decoyed them
there I do not know, but once inside the door they
were at his mercy.”
The inspector examined the pipe with interest.
“One of our ofﬁcers mentioned the smell of gas,”
said he, “but of course the window and door were
open then, and the paint—or some of it—was al-
ready about. He had begun the work of painting
the day before, according to his story. But what
next, Mr. Holmes?”
“Well, then came an incident which was rather
unexpected to myself. I was slipping through the
pantry window in the early dawn when I felt a
hand inside my collar, and a voice said: ‘Now, you
rascal, what are you doing in there?’ When I could
twist my head round I looked into the tinted spec-
tacles of my friend and rival, Mr. Barker. It was a
curious foregathering and set us both smiling. It
seems that he had been engaged by Dr. Ray Ernest’s
family to make some investigations and had come
to the same conclusion as to foul play. He had
watched the house for some days and had spotted
Dr. Watson as one of the obviously suspicious char-
acters who had called there. He could hardly arrest
Watson, but when he saw a man actually climbing
out of the pantry window there came a limit to his
restraint. Of course, I told him how matters stood
and we continued the case together.”
“Why him? Why not us?”
“Because it was in my mind to put that little test
which answered so admirably. I fear you would not
have gone so far.”
The inspector smiled.
“Well, maybe not. I understand that I have your
word, Mr. Holmes, that you step right out of the
case now and that you turn all your results over to
us.”
“Certainly, that is always my custom.”
“Well, in the name of the force I thank you. It
seems a clear case, as you put it, and there can’t be
much difﬁculty over the bodies.”
“I’ll show you a grim little bit of evidence,” said
Holmes, “and I am sure Amberley himself never
observed it. You’ll get results, Inspector, by always
putting yourself in the other fellow’s place, and
thinking what you would do yourself. It takes
some imagination, but it pays. Now, we will sup-
pose that you were shut up in this little room, had
not two minutes to live, but wanted to get even
with the ﬁend who was probably mocking at you
978
from the other side of the door. What would you
do?”
“Write a message.”
“Exactly. You would like to tell people how you
died. No use writing on paper. That would be
seen. If you wrote on the wall someone might rest
upon it. Now, look here! Just above the skirting is
scribbled with a purple indelible pencil: ‘We we—’
That’s all.”
“What do you make of that?”
“Well, it’s only a foot above the ground. The
poor devil was on the ﬂoor dying when he wrote it.
He lost his senses before he could ﬁnish.”
“He was writing, ‘We were murdered.’ ”
“That’s how I read it. If you ﬁnd an indelible
pencil on the body—”
“We’ll look out for it, you may be sure. But
those securities? Clearly there was no robbery at
all. And yet he did possess those bonds. We veri-
ﬁed that.”
“You may be sure he has them hidden in a safe
place. When the whole elopement had passed into
history, he would suddenly discover them and an-
nounce that the guilty couple had relented and sent
back the plunder or had dropped it on the way.”
“You certainly seem to have met every difﬁ-
culty,” said the inspector. “Of course, he was bound
to call us in, but why he should have gone to you I
can’t understand.”
“Pure swank!” Holmes answered. “He felt so
clever and so sure of himself that he imagined noone could touch him. He could say to any suspi-
cious neighbour, ‘Look at the steps I have taken. I
have consulted not only the police but even Sher-
lock Holmes.’ ”
The inspector laughed.
“We must forgive you your ‘even,’ Mr. Holmes,”
said he, “it’s as workmanlike a job as I can remem-
ber.”
A couple of days later my friend tossed across
to me a copy of the bi-weekly North Surrey Ob-
server . Under a series of ﬂaming headlines, which
began with “The Haven Horror” and ended with
“Brilliant Police Investigation,” there was a packed
column of print which gave the ﬁrst consecutive
account of the affair. The concluding paragraph is
typical of the whole. It ran thus:
The remarkable acumen by which Inspec-
tor MacKinnon deduced from the smell of
paint that some other smell, that of gas, for
example, might be concealed; the bold de-
duction that the strong-room might also be
the death-chamber, and the subsequent in-
quiry which led to the discovery of the bod-
ies in a disused well, cleverly concealed by
a dog-kennel, should live in the history of
crime as a standing example of the intelli-
gence of our professional detectives.
“Well, well, MacKinnon is a good fellow,” said
Holmes with a tolerant smile. “You can ﬁle it in
our archives, Watson. Some day the true story may
be told.”
979
